
*Man*s  most  important  food,  fat.** 

'Those  who  say — 'The  old  fashioned  things  are  good 
enough  for  us.*  ** 

*The  difference  between  substitute  and  primary.** 

'That  'Lardy*  taste.** 

'Fry  fishy  then  onions,  then  potatoes  xn  the  sameCrisco.** 

'We  all  eat  raw  fats.** 

'A  woman  can  throw  out  more  with  a  teaspoon  than  a 
man  can  bring  home  in  a  wagon.** 

'Hidden  flavors" 

^Keeping  parlor  and  kitchen  strangers.** 

'Kosher.** 

'Recipes  tested  by  Domestic  Scientists.** 


INTRODUCTION 


The  word  "fat"  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  in  food 
chemistry.  It  is  the  great  energy  producer.  John  C.  Olsen, 
A.  M.,  Ph.  D.,  in  his  book,  "Pure  Food,"  states  that  fats 
furnish  half  the  total  energy  obtained  by  human  beings  from 
their  food.     The  three  primaryy  solid  cooking  fats  today  are: 


^r\ 


Butter 


There    are    numbers   of   substitutes    for   these,    such    as 
butterine,  oleomargarine  and  "lard  compounds." 

The  following  pages  contain  a  story  of  unusual  interest 
to  you.     For  you  eat. 


See  Fa^e  2d3 


The  Story  of  Crisco 


HE   culinary   world    is    revising   its   entire   cook 
book  on  account  of  the  advent  of  Crisco,  a  new 
,   and    altogether   different   cooking   fat. 

Many  wonder  that  any  product  could  gain 
,  the  favor  of  cooking  experts  so  quickly.  A  few 
months  after  the  first  package  was  marketed, 
practically  every  grocer  of  the  better  class  in  the  United 
States  was  supplying  women  with  the  new  product. 

This  was  largely  because  four  classes  of  people — 
housewives  —  chefs  —  doctors  —  dietitians  —  were  glad  to  be 
shown  a  product  which  at  once  would  make  for  more  digestible 
foods,  more  economical  foods,  and  better  tasting  foods. 

Cooking  and  History 

Cooking  methods  have  undergone  a  marked  change  dur- 
ing the  past  few  years.  The  nation's  food  is  becoming  more 
and  more  wholesome  as  a  result  of  different  discoveries,  new 
sources  of  supply,  and  the  intelligent  weighing  of  values. 
Domestic  Science  is  better  understood  and  more  appreciated. 

People  of  the  present  century  are  fairer  to  their  stomachs, 
realizing  that  their  health  largely  depends  upon  this  faithful 
and  long-suffering  servant.  Digestion  and  disposition  sound 
much  the  same,  but  a  good  disposition  often  is  wrecked  by  a 
poor  digestion. 

America  has  been  termed  a  country  of  dyspeptics.  It 
is  being  changed  to  a  land  of  healthy  eaters,  consequently 
happier  individuals.  Every  agent  responsible  for  this  national 
digestive  improvement  must  be  gratefully  recognized. 

It  seems  strange  to  many  that  there  can  be  anything 
better  than  butter  for  cooking,  or  of  greater  utility  than  larc^ 
and  the  advent  of  Crisco  has  been  a  shock  to  the  older  gener- 
ation, born  in  an  age  less  progressive  than  our  own,  and  prone 
to  contend  that  the  old  fashioned  things  are  good  enough. 


The  Story  oj  Crisco 

But  these  good  folk,  when  convinced,  are  the  greatest 
enthusiasts.  Grandmother  was  glad  to  give  up  the  fatiguing 
spinning  wheel.  So  the  modern  woman  is  glad  to  stop 
cooking  with  expensive  butter,  animal  lard  and  their  inade- 
quate substitutes. 

And  so,  the  nation's  cook  book  has  been  hauled  out 
and  is  being  revised.  Upon  thousands  of  pages,  the  words 
"lard"  and  "butter"  have  been  crossed  out  and  the  word 
"Crisco"  written  in  their  place. 

A  Need  Anticipated 

Great  foresight  was  shown  in  the  making  of  Crisco. 

The  quality,  as  well  as  the  quantity,  of  lard  was 
diminishing  steadily  in  the  face  of  a  growing  population. 
Prices  were  rising.  "The  high-cost-of-living"  was  an  oft- 
repeated  phrase.  Also,  our  country  was  outgrowing  its 
supply  of  butter.  What  was  needed,  therefore,  was  not  a 
substitute,  but  something  better  than  these  fats,  some  product 
which  not  only  would  accomplish  as  much  in  cookery,  but  a 
great  deal  more. 

When,  therefore,  Crisco  was  perfected,  and  it  was  shown 
that  here  finally  was  an  altogether  new  and  better  fat,  cook- 
ery experts  were  quick  to  show  their  appreciation. 

In  reading  the  following  pages,  think  of  Crisco  as  a 
primary  cooking  fat  or  shortening  with  even  more  individ- 
uality (because  it  does  greater  things),  than  all  others. 

Man's  Most  Important  Food,  Fat 

No  other  food  supplies  our  bodies  with  the  drive,  the  vigor, 
which  fat  gives.  No  other  food  has  been  given  so  little  study 
in  proportion  to  its  importance. 

Here  are  interesting  facts,  yet  few  housewives  are  ac- 
quainted with  them: 

Fat  contains  more  than  twice  the  amount  of  energy- 
yielding  power  or  calorific  value  of  proteids  or  carbohydrates. 
One  half  our  physical  energy  is  from  the  fat  we  eat  in  different 
forms.  The  excellent  book,  "Food  and  Cookery  for  the 
Sick  and  Convalescent,"  by  Fannie  Merritt  Farmer,  states, 
"In  the  diet  of  children  at  least,  a  deficiency  of  fat  cannot 

10 


The  Story  of  Crisco 

be  replaced  by  an  excess  of  carbohydrates;  and  that  fat  seems 
to  play  some  part  in  the  formation  of  young  tissues  which  can- 
not be  undertaken  by  any  other  constituent  of  food " 

The  book  entitled  "The  Chemistry  of  Cooking  and 
Cleaning,"  by  the  two  authorities,  Ellen  H.  Richards  and  S. 
Maria  Elliott,  states  that  the  diet  of  school  children  should 
be  regulated  carefully  with  the  fat  supply  in  view.  Girls, 
especially,  show  at  times  a  dislike  for  fat.  It  therefore  is 
necessary  that  the  fat  which  supplies  their  growing  bodies  with 
energy  should  be  in  the  purest  and  most  inviting  form  and 
should  be  one  that  their  digestions  zvelcome,  rather  than  repel. 

The  first  step  in  the  digestion  of 
fat  is  its  melting.  Crisco  melts  at  a 
lower  degree  of  heat  than  body  tem- 
perature. Because  of  its  low  melt- 
ing point,  thus  allowing  the  digestive 
juices  to  mix  with  it,  and  because 
of  its  vegetable  origin  and  its  purity,  Crisco  is  the  easiest 
of  all  cooking  fats  to  digest. 

When  a  fat  smokes  in  frying,  it  "breaks  down,"  that  is, 
its  chemical  composition  is  changed;  part  of  its  altered  com- 
position becomes  a  non-digestible  and  irritating  substance. 
The  best  fat  for  digestion  is  one  which  does  not  decompose 
or  break  down  at  frying  temperature.  Crisco  does  not  break 
down  until  a  degree  of  heat  is  reached  above  the  frying 
point.  In  other  words,  Crisco  does  not  break  down  at  all  in 
normal  frying,  because  it  is  not  necessary  to  have  it  "smok- 
ing hot"  for  frying.  No  part  of  it,  therefore,  has  been  trans- 
formed in  cooking  into  an  irritant.  That  is  one  reason  why 
the  stomach  welcomes  Crisco  and  carries  forward  its  digestion 
with  ease. 

Working  Towards  an  Ideal 

A  part  of  the  preliminary  work  done  in  connection  with 
the  development  of  Crisco,  described  in  these  pages,  consisted 
of  the  study  of  the  older  cooking  fats.  The  objectionable 
features  of  each  were  considered.  The  good  was  weighed 
against  the  bad.  The  strength  and  weakness  of  each  was 
determined.  Thus  was  found  what  the  ideal  fat  should 
possess,  and  what  it  should  not  possess.  It  must  have  every 
good  quality  and  no  bad  one. 

11 


Tfu  Story  of  Crisco 

After  years  of  study,  a  process  was  discovered  which 
made  possible  the  ideal  fat. 

The  process  involved  the  changing  of  the  composition 
of  vegetable  food  oils  and  the  making  of  the  richest  fat  or 
solid  cream. 

The  Crisco  Process  at  the  first  stage  of  its  development 
gave,  at  least,  the  basisof  the  ideal  fat;  namely,  z  pure  vegetable 
product,  differing  from  all  others  in  that  absolutely  no  animal 
fat  had  to  be  added  to  the  vegetable  oil  to  produce  the  proper 
stiffness.  This  was  but  one  of  the  many  distinctive  advantages 
sought  and  found. 

Not  Marketed  Until  Perfect 

It  also  solved  the  problem  of  eliminating  certain  objection- 
able features  of  fats  in  general,  such  as  rancidity,  color, 
odor,  smoking  properties  when  heated.  These  weaknesses, 
therefore,  were  not  a  part  of  this  new  fat,  which  it  would 
seem  was  the  parent  of  the  Ideal. 

Then  after  four  years  of  severe  tests,  after  each  weakness 
was  replaced  with  strength  the  Government  was  given  this 
fat  to  analyze  and  classify.  The  report  was  that  it  answered 
to  none  of  the  tests  for  fats  already  existing. 

A  Primary  Fat 

It  was  neither  a  butter,  a  "compound"  nor  a  "substitute," 
but  an  entirely  new  product.     A  primary  fat. 

In  1911  it  was  named  Crisco  and  placed  upon  the  market. 

Today  you  buy  this  rich,  wholesome  cream  of  nutritious 
food  oils  in  sanitary  tins.  The  "Crisco  Process"  alone  can 
produce  this  creamy  white  fat.  No  one  else  can  manufac- 
ture Crisco,  because  no  one  else  holds  the  secret  of  Crisco 
and  because  they  would  have  no  legal  right  to  make  it. 
Crisco  is  Crisco,  and  nothing  else. 

Finally  Economical 

At  first,  it  looked  very  much  as  if  Crisco  must  be  a 
high-priced  product.  It  cost  its  discoverers  many  thousands 
of  dollars  before  ever  a  package  reached  the  consumer's 
kitchen. 

12 


The  Story  of  Crisco 

Crisco  was  not  offered  for  sale  as  a  substitute,  or  for 
housewives  to  buy  only  to  save  money.  The  chief  point 
emphasized  was,  that  Crisco  was  a  richer,  more  whole- 
some food  fat  for  cooking.  Naturally,  therefore,  it  was  good 
news  to  all  when  Crisco  was  found  also  to  be  more  economical. 

Crisco  is  more  economical  than  lard  in  another  way. 
It  makes  richer  pastry  than  lard,  and  one-fifth  less  can  be  used. 
Furthermore  it  can  be  used  over  and  over  again  in  frying 
all  manner  of  foods,  and  because  foods  absorbs  so  little, 
Crisco  is  in  reality  more  economical  even  than  lard  of 
mediocre  quality.  The  price  of  Crisco  is  lower  than  the 
average  price  of  the  best  pail  lard  throughout  the  year. 


13 


The  Story  of  Crisco 


COOLING  IN  A  ROOM 
WITH  GLASS  WALLS 


FILLING  BY  MACHINERY 


AUTOMATIC  LABELING 


Crisco's  Manufacture 


It  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  sur- 
roundings more  appetizing  than  those 
in  which  Crisco  is  manufactured.  It  is 
made  in  a  building  devoted  exclusively 
to  the  manufacture  of  this  one  product. 
In  sparkling  bright  rooms,  cleanly  uni- 
formed employees  make  and  pack  Crisco. 

The  floors  are  of  a  special  tile 
composition;  the  walls  are  of  white 
glazed  tile,  which  are  washed  regularly. 
White  enamel  covers  metal  surfaces 
where  nickel  plating  cannot  be  used. 
Sterilized  machines  handle  the  oil  and 
the  finished  product.  No  hand  touches 
Crisco  until  in  your  own  kitchen  the 
sanitary  can  is  opened,  disclosing  the 
smooth  richness,  the  creamlike,  appetiz- 
ing consistency  of  the  product. 


The  Banishment  of  That  "Lardy"  Taste  in  Foods 

It  was  the  earnest  aim  of  the  makers  of  Crisco  to  produce 
a  strictly  vegetable  product  without  adding  a  hard,  and  conse- 
quently indigestible  animal  fat.  There  is  today  a  pronounced 
partiality  from  a  health  standpoint  to  a  vegetable  fat,  and 

14 


The  Story  of  Crisco 

the  lardy,  greasy  taste  of  food  resulting  from  the  use  of  ani- 
mal fat  never  has  been  in  such  disfavor  as  during  the  past 
few  years. 

So  Crisco  is  absolutely  all  vegetable.  No  stearine,  ani- 
mal or  vegetable,  is  added.  It  possesses  no  taste  nor  odor 
save  the  delightful  and  characteristic  aroma  which  iden- 
tifies Crisco,  and  is  suggestive  of  its  purity. 


Explanation  of  "Hidden"  Food  Flavors 

When  the  dainty  shadings  of 
taste  are  over-shadowed  by  a  "lardy" 
flavor,  the  true  taste  of  the  food  itself 
is  lost.  We  miss  the  "hidden"  or 
natural  taste  of  the  food.  Crisco  has 
a  peculiar  power  of  bringing  out  the 
very  best  in  food  flavors.  Even  the 
simplest  foods  are  allowed 
a  delicacy  of  flavor. 

Take  ginger  bread  for  example:  The 
real  ginger  taste  is  there.  The  true  molasses 
and  spice  flavors  are  brought  out. 

Or  just  plain,  every-day  fried  potatoes;  many  never 
knew  what  the  real  potato  taste  was  before  eating  potatoes 
fried  in  Crisco. 

Fried  chicken  has  a  newness  of  taste  not  known  before. 

New  users  of  Crisco  should  try  these  simple  foods  first 
and  later  take  up  the  preparation  of  more  elaborate  dishes. 


Butter,  Ever  Popular    . 

For  seasoning  in  cooking,  the  use  of  butter  ever  will  be 
largely  a  matter  of  taste.  Some  people  have  a  partiality  for 
the  "butter  flavor,"  which  after  all  is  largely  the  salt  mixed 
with  the  fat.  Close  your  eyes  and  eat  some  fresh  unsalted 
butter ;  note  that  it  is  practically  tasteless. 


15 


The  Story  of  Crisco 


Cfisco  contains  richer  food  elements  than 
butter.      As  Crisco  is   richer,  containing  no 
^v^B^rTEjR  ^    moisture,  one-htth  or  one-fourth  less  can  be 
■^^  -'?;..,  used  in  each  recipe. 

Crisco  always  is  uniform  because  it  is  a  manufactured 
fat  where  quality  and  purity  can  be  controlled.  It  works  per- 
fectly into  any  dough,  making  the  crust  or  loaf  even  textured. 
It  keeps  sweet  and  pure  indefinitely  in  the  ordinary  room 
temperature. 

Keep  Your  Parlor  and  Your  Kitchen  Strangers 

Kitchen  odors  are  out  of  place  in  the  parlor.  When  fry- 
ing with  Crisco,  as  before  explained,  it  is  not  necessary  to  heat 
the  fat  to  smoking  temperature.  Ideal  frying  is  accomplished 
without  bringing  Crisco  to  its  smoking  point.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  necessary  to  heat  lard  "smoking  hot"  before  it  is 
of  the  proper  frying  temperature.  Remember  also  that,  when 
lard  smokes  and  fills  the  house  with  its  strong  odor,  certain 
constituents  have  been  changed 
chemically  to  those  which  irritate 
the  sensitive  membranes  of  the 
alimentary  canal. 

Crisco  does  not  smoke  until  it 
reaches  455  degrees,  a  heat  higher 
than  is  necessary  for  frying.  You 
need  not  wait  for  Crisco  to  smoke. 
Consequently  the  house  will  not 
fill  with  smoke,  nor  will  there  be  black,  burnt  specks  in  fried 
foods,  as  often  there  are  when  you  use  lard  for  frying. 

Crisco  gives  up  its  heat  very  quickly  to  the  food  sub- 
merged in  it  and  a  tender,  brown  crust  almost  instantly 
forms,  allowing  the  inside  of  the  potatoes,  croquettes,  dough- 
nuts, etc.,  to  become  baked,  rather  than  soaked. 


Tht  Lard  Kiuhm. 


Tht  Crisct  Kitchen — 
A'«  Snuh. 


Fry  this— 


Then  this— 


Then  this— 

in  the  same  Crisco 


The  same  Crisco  can  be  used  for  frying  fish,  onions, 
potatoes,  or  any  other  food.  Crisco  does  not  take  up  food 
flavors  or  odors.  After  frying  each  food,  merely  strain  out 
the  food  particles. 

16 


The  Story  of  Crisco 

We  All  Eat  Raw  Fats 

The  shortening  fat  in  pastry  or  baked  foods,  is  merely 
distributed  throughout  the  dough.  No  chemical  change 
occurs  during  the  baking  process.  So  when  you  eat  pie  or 
hot  biscuit,  in  which  animal  lard  is  used,  you  eat  raw  animal 
lard.  The  shortening  used  in  all  baked  foods  therefore, 
should  be  just  as  pure  and  wholesome  as  if  you  were  eating 
it  Hke  butter  upon  bread.  Because  Crisco  digests  with  such 
ease,  and  because  it  is  a  pure  vegetable  fat,  all  those  who 
realize  the  above  fact  regarding  pastry  making  are  now  won 
over  to  Crisco. 

A  hint  as  to  Crisco's  purity  is  shown  by  this  simple  test: 
Break  open  a  hot  biscuit  in  which  Crisco  has  been  used.  You 
will  note  a  sweet  fragrance,  which  is  most  inviting. 

A  few  years  ago  if  you  had  told  dyspeptic  men  and  women 
that  they  could  eat  pie  at  the  evening  meal  and  that  distress 
would  not  follow,  probably  they  would  have  doubted  you. 
Hundreds  of  instances  of  Crisco's  healthfulness  have  been 
given  by  people,  who  at  one  time  have  been  denied  such  foods 
as  pastry,  cake  and  fried  foods,  but  who  now  eat  these  rich, 
yet  digestible  Crisco  dishes. 

You,  or  any  other  normally  healthy  individual,  whose 
digestion  does  not  relish  greasy  foods,  can  eat  rich  pie  crust. 
The  richness  is  there,  but  not  the  unpleasant  after  effects. 
Crisco  digests  readily. 

The  Importance  of  Giving  Children 
Crisco  Foods 

A  good  digestion  will  mean  much  to  the  youngster's 
health  and  character.  A  man  seldom  seems  to  be  stronger 
than  his  stomach,  for  indigestion  handicaps  him  in  his 
accomplishment  of  big  things. 

As  more  attention  is  given  to  present  feeding,  less  atten- 
tion need  be  given  to  future  doctoring. 

Equip  your  children  with  good  stomachs  by  giving  them 
wholesome  Crisco  foods — foods  which  digest  with  ease. 

17 


The  Story  of  Crisco 

They  may  eat  the  rich  things  they  enjoy  and  find  them 
just  as  digestible  as  many  apparently  simple  foods,  if  Crisco 
be  used  properly. 

They  may  eat  Crisco  doughnuts  or  pie  without  being 
chased  by  nightmares.     Sweet  dreams  follow  the  Crisco  supper. 

The  Great  Variety  of  Crisco  Foods 

There  are  thousands  of  Crisco  dishes.  It  is  impossible 
to  know  the  exact  number,  because  Crisco  is  used  for  practi- 
cally every  cooking  purpose.  Women  daily  tell  us  of  new 
uses  they  have  found  for  Crisco. 

Many  women  begin  by  using  Crisco  in  simple  ways,  for 
frying,  for  baking,  in  place  of  lard.  Soon,  however,  they 
learn  that  Crisco  also  takes  the  place  of  butter.  "Butter 
richness  without  butter  expense,"  say  the  thousands  of  Crisco 
users. 

Tasty  scalloped  dishes,  salad  dressing,  rich  pastry,  fine 
grained  cake,  sauces  and  hundreds  of  other  dishes,  where 
butter  formerly  was  used,  now  are  prepared  with  Crisco. 

"A  Woman  Can  Throw  Out  More  with  a  Teaspoon 
Than  a  Man  Can  Bring  Home  in  a  Wagon" 

Kitchen  expense  comes  by  the  spoonful.     Think 
^^    of   the    countless    spoonfuls    of   expensive    butter 
used    daily,    where    economical    Crisco   would    ac- 
complish the  same  results  at  one-third  the  cost. 

It  should  be  remembered  that  one-fifth  less 
Crisco  than  butter  may  be  used,  because  Crisco 
is  richer  than  butter.  The  moisture,  salt  and 
curd  which  butter  contains  to  the  extent  of  about 

20  per  cent  are  not  found  in  Crisco,  which  is  a//,  (100  per 

cent)   shortening. 

Remember  also  that  Crisco  will  average  a  lower  price 
per  pound  throughout  the  year  than  the  best  pail  lard.  And  you 
can  use  less  Crisco  than  lard,  which  is  a  further  saving. 

18 


The  Story  of  Crisco 

Brief,  Interesting  Facts 

Crisco  is  being  used  in  an  increasing  number  of  the  better 
class  hotels,  clubs,  restaurants,  dining  cars,  ocean  liners. 

Crisco  has  been  demonstrated  and  explained  upon 
the  Chautauqua  platform  by  Domestic  Science  experts, 
these  lectures  being  a  part  of  the  regular  course. 

Domestic   Science   teachers   recommend   Crisco   to   their 
pupils  and  use  it  in  their  classes  and 
lecture    demonstrations.     Many    High 
Schools  having   Domestic   Science  de- 
partments use  Crisco. 

Crisco  has  taken  the  place  of  butter 
and  lard  in  a  number  of  hospitals,  where 
purity  and  digestibility  are  of  vital 
importance.  ^"^"''  ^'^'  ^''^ 

Crisco  is  Kosher.  Rabbi  Margolies  of  New  York,  said 
that  the  Hebrew  Race  had  been  waiting  4,000  years  for  Crisco. 
It  conforms  to  the  strict  Dietary  Laws  of  the  Jews.  It  is 
what  is  known  in  the  Hebrew  language  as  a  "parava,"  or 
neutral  fat.  Crisco  can  be  used  with  both  "milchig"  and 
"fleichig"   (milk   and   flesh)  foods. 

Campers  find  Crisco  helpful  in  many  ways.  Hot  climates 
have  little  effect  upon  its  wholesomeness. 

It  is  convenient;  a  handy  package  to  pack  and  does  not 
melt  so  quickly  in  transit.  One  can  of  Crisco  can  be  used  to 
fry  fish,  eggs,  potatoes  and  to  make  hot  biscuits,  merely,  by 
straining  out  the  food  particles  after  each  frying  and  pouring 
the  Crisco  back  into  the  can  to  harden  to  proper  consistency 
before  the  biscuit  making. 

Practically  every  grocer  who  has  a  good  trade  in  Crisco, 
uses  it  in  his  own  home. 

Crisco  is  sold  by  net  weight.  You  pay  only  for  the  Crisco 
— not  the  can.  Find  the  net  weight  of  what  you  have  been 
using. 

Bread  and  cake  keep  fresh  and  moist  much  longer  when 
Crisco  is  used. 

■•"^  - -•''z^  -  ^^^  ..         Women   have  written   that   they   use 
^^l^Mi^l^jg^^W     empty  Crisco  tins  for  canning  vegetables 
^^jyVa^PW^y      and  fruits,  and  as  receptacles  for  kitchen 
'""''^"'"''"""*^^~       and  pantry  use. 

19 


The  Story  of  Crisco 

Crisco's  Manufacture  Scientifically  Explained 

To  understand  something  of  the  Crisco  Process,  it  is 
necessary  first  to  know  that  there  are  three  main  constituents 
in  all  the  best  edible  oils. 

Linoline, 

Oleine, 

Stearine. 

The  chemical  difference  between  these  three  components 
is  solely  in  the  percentage  of  hydrogen  contained,  and  it  is 
possible  by  the  addition  of  hydrogen,  to  transform  one 
component  into  another. 

Though  seemingly  so  much  alike,  there  is  a  marked  differ- 
ence in  the  physical  properties  of  these  components. 

Linoline  which  has  the  lowest  percentage  of  hydrogen,  is 
unstable  and  tends  to  turn  rancid. 

Oleine  is  stable,  has  no  tendency  to  turn  rancid  and  is 
easily  digested. 

Stearine  is  both  hard  and  digestible. 

The  Crisco  process  adds  enough  hydrogen  to  change 
almost  all  the  linoline  into  nourishing  digestible  oleine. 

Mark  well  the  difference  in  manufacture  between  Crisco 
and  lard  compounds.  In  producing  a  lard  compound,  to  the 
linoline,  oleine  and  stearine  of  the  original  oil  is  added  more 
.  stearine  (usually  animal),  the  hard  indigestible  fat,  in  order 
to  bring  up  the  hardness  of  the  oil.  The  resultant  com- 
pound is  indigestible  and  very  liable  to  become  rancid. 


The  following  pages  contain  615  recipes  which  have 
been  tested  by  Domestic  Science  Authorities  in  the  Cook- 
ing Departments  of  different  colleges  and  other  educational 
institutions,  and  by  housewives  in  their  own  kitchens.  Many 
have  been  originated  by  Marion  Harris  Neil  and  all  have 
been  tested  by  her. 

We  have  undertaken  to  submit  a  comprehensive  list  of 
recipes  for  your  use,  which  will  enable  you  to  serve  menus  of 
wide  variety. 

We  hope  that  you  have  enjoyed  reading  this  little  volume 
and  that  you  will  derive  both  help  and  satisfaction  from  the 
recipes. 

20 


The  Story  of  Crisco 

We  will  go  to  any  length  to  help  you  in  the  cause  of 
Better  Food.  We  realize  that  women  must  study  this 
product  as  they  would  any  other  altogether  new  article  of 
cookery,  and  that  the  study  and  care  used  will  be  amply 
repaid  by  the  palatability  and  healthfulness  of  all  foods.  A 
can  of  Crisco  is  no  Aladdin's  Lamp,  which  merely  need  be 
touched  by  a  kitchen  spoon  to  produce  magical  dishes. 
But  any  woman  is  able  to  achieve  excellent  results  by  mix- 
ing thought  with  Crisco. 

Let  us  know  how  you  progress. 

Yours  respectfully, 


OF  CANADA.  LTD  ^ 


^ 


21 


Use  level  measurements 


Things  to  Remember  in  Connection  with 
These  Recipes 

No  need  for  Crisco  to  occupy 
valuable  space  in  the  refrigerator.  In 
fact,  except  in  most  unusual  summer 
heat,  it  will  be  of  a  better  consist- 
ency outside  the  refrigerator.  Crisco 
keeps  sweet  indefinitely,  summer  and 
winter,  at  ordinary  room  temperature. 

In  making  sauces,  thoroughly 
blend  the  flour  and  Crisco  before 
adding   the   milk. 

In  using  melted  Crisco  in  boiled  dressing,  croquettes, 
rolls,  fritters,  etc.,  be  sure  that  the  melted  Crisco  is  cooled 
sufficiently  so  that  the  hot  fat  will  not  injure  the  texture 
of  the  foods. 

When  using  in  place  of  butter,  add  salt  in  the  propor- 
tion of  one  level  teaspoonful  to  one  cup  of  Crisco. 

Remember  that  Crisco,  like  butter,  is  susceptible  to 
cold.  It  readily  becomes  hard.  In  creaming  Crisco  in  winter 
use  the  same  care  as  when  creaming  butter.  Rinse  pan  in 
boiling  water  and  have  the  Crisco  of  the  proper  creaming 
stiffness  before  using.  Unlike  butter,  however,  Crisco's 
purity  is  not  effected  by  weather.  It  remains  sweet  and  pure 
mdefinitely  without  refrigeration. 

In  deep  frying,  do  not  wait  for  Crisco  to  smoke.  (See 
page  35.) 


22 


Remember  That — 

When  pie  crust  is  tough:  It  is  possible  you  have  not  used 
Crisco  properly.  Perhaps  the  measurements  were  not  cor- 
rect. Perhaps  the  water  was  too  warm,  or  the  dough  was 
handled  too  much.     Shortening  cannot  make  pastry  tough. 

When  fried  foods  absorb:  It  is  because  Crisco  is  not  hot 
enough,  or  because  you  have  not  used  enough  Crisco.  Use 
plenty  and  the  raw  foods,  if  added  in  small  quantities,  will  not 
reduce  the  heat  of  the  fat.  The  absorption  in  deep  Crisco 
frying  should  be  less  than  that  of  another  fat. 

When  cake  is  not  a  success:  It  is  not  the  fault  of  the 
Crisco.  Either  too  much  was  used,  the  oven  heat  not  per- 
fectly controlled  or  some  important  ingredient  was  used  in 
the  wrong  proportion.  Crisco  should  be  creamed  with  the 
sugar  more  thoroughly  than  butter,  as  Crisco  contains  no 
moisture  to  dissolve  the  sugar. 

When  cake  or  other  food  is  not  flavory:  Salt  should  have 
been  added  to  the  Crisco,  for  Crisco  contains  no  salt. 

When  there  is  smoke  in  the  kitchen:  Crisco  has  been 
burned  or  heated  too  high  for  frying.  Or  some  may  have  been 
on  the  outside  of  the  pan  or  kettle. 

When  Crisco  is  too  hard:  Like  butter,  it  is  susceptible  to 
heat  and  cold.     Simply  put  in  a  warmer  place. 


23 


Hints  to  Young  Cooks 


Also,  How  to  Choose  Foods,  Methods  of 
Cooking,  Cooking  Time  Table,  The  Art 
of  Carving,  by  Marion  Harris  Neil. 


■***^EFORE  commencing  to  cook,  look  up  the 
required  recipe,  read  and  think  it  out.  Note 
down  on  a  slip  of  paper  the  materials  and  quan- 
tities required.  Collect  all  utensils  and  materials 
ii  required  before  commencing.  Success  in  cookery 
depends  on  careful  attention  to  every  detail 
from  start  to  finish.  Quantities,  both  liquid  and  dry,  should 
be  exact.  Small  scales  and  weights  should  form  part  of  the 
kitchen  equipment  where  possible,  and  the  measuring  cups 
cost  so  little  that  no  one  need  be  without  them. 

Throughout  this  book 

the  measurements  are  level 


24 


How  to  Choose  Foods 


■^ONEY  can  be  spent  to  infinitely  better  advan- 

Ml  tage  in  the  store,  than  by  giving  orders  at  the 
i  door,  by  phone  or  mail.  Every  housekeeper 
T  knows  how  large  a  proportion  of  the  housekeep- 
1  ing  money  is  swallowed  up  by  the  butcher's  bill, 

' ^"^^  so    that   with  the   meat    item  careful  selection 

is  most  necessary  in  order  to  keep  the  bills  within  bounds. 
In  choosing  meat  of  any  kind  the  eye,  the  nose  and  the 
touch  really  are  required,  although  it  is  not  appetizing  to  see 
the  purchaser  use  more  than  the  eye. 

Beef 

In  choosing  meat  it  should  be  remembered  that  without 
being  actually  unwholesome,  it  varies  greatly  in  quality,  and 
often  an  inferior  joint  is  to  be  preferred  from  a  first  class 
beast  to  a  more  popular  cut  from  a  second  class  animal. 
To  be  perfect  the  animal  should  be  five  or  six  years  old,  the 
flesh  of  a  close  even  grain,  bright  red  in  color  and  well  mixed 
with  creamy  white  fat,  the  suet  being  firm  and  a  clear  white. 
Heifer  meat  is  smaller  in  the  bone  and  lighter  in  color  than  ox 
beef.  Cow  beef  is  much  the  same  to  look  at  as  ox  beef, 
though  being  older  it  is  both  coarser  in  the  grain  and  tougher; 
bull  beef,  which  is  never  seen  however,  in  a  first  class  butcher's 
may  be  recognized  by  the  coarseness  and  dark  color  of  the 
flesn,  and  also  by  a  strong  and  almost  rank  smell. 

Mutton 

To  be  in  perfection,  mutton  should  be  at  least  four,  or 
better  five  or  six  years  old,  but  sheep  of  this  age  are  rarely  if 
ever,  met  with  now-a-days,  when  they  are  constantly  killed 
under  two  years.  To  know  the  age  of  mutton,  examine  the 
breast  bones;  if  these  are  all  of  a  white  gristly  color  the  animal 
was  four  years  old  or  over,  while  the  younger  it  is  the  pinkier 
are  the  bones,  which,  in  a  sheep  of  under  a  year,  are  entirely  red. 

Good  mutton  should  be  of  a  clear  dark  red,  the  fat  firm  and 
white,  and  not  too  much  of  it;  when  touched  the  meat  should 
feel  crisp  yet  tender.  If  the  fat  is  yellow  and  the  lean  flabby 
and  damp,  it  is  bad.  A  freshly  scraped  wooden  skewer  run  into 
the  meat  along  the  bone  will  speedily  enable  anyone  to  detect 
staleness.     For  roasting  mutton  scarcely  can  be  hung  too  long, 

25 


How  to  Choose  Foods 

as  long  as  it  is  not  tainted;  but  for  boiling  it  must  not  be  kept 
nearly  so  long  or  the  meat  will  be  of  a  bad  color  when  cooked. 

Lamb 

The  freshness  of  lamb  is  comparatively  easy  to  distinguish, 
as  if  fresh  the  neck  vein  will  be  a  bright  blue,  the  knuckles 
stiff,  and  the  eyes  bright  and  full. 

Veal 

Veal  is  at  its  best  when  the  calf  is  from  three  to  four 
months  old.  The  meat  should  be  of  a  close  firm  grain,  white 
in  color  and  the  fat  inclining  to  a  pinkish  tinge.  Veal  is 
sometimes  coarser  in  the  grain,  and  redder  in  the  flesh,  not 
necessarily  a  mark  of  inferiority,  but  denoting  the  fact  that 
calf  has  been  brought  up  in  the  open.  Like  all  young  meat, 
veal  turns  very  quickly,  therefore  it  never  should  hang  more 
than  two  or  three  days.  In  choosing  veal  always  examine  the 
suet  under  the  kidney;  if  this  be  clammy  and  soft,  with  a 
faint  odor,  the  meat  is  not  good,  and  always  reject  any  that 
has  greenish  or  yellowish  spots  about  it.  The  head  should  be 
clean  skinned  and  firm,  the  eyes  full  and  clear,  the  kidneys 
large  and  well  covered  with  fat,  the  liver  a  rich  dark  clear 
color,  free  from  any  spots  or  gristle,  while  the  sweetbreads 
should  be  firm,  plump,  of  a  delicate  color,  and  free  from  strings. 

Pork 

The  flesh  of  pork,  when  in  good  condition,  is  a  delicate 
pinky  white,  with  a  close  fine  grain;  the  fat,  which  should  not  be 
too  abundant,  of  a  white  color,  very  faintly  tinged  with  pink; 
the  skin  should  be  thin  and  elastic  to  the  touch,  and  the  flesh 
generally  cool,  clean,  and  smooth  looking;  if,  on  the  contrary, 
the  flesh  is  flabby  and  clammy  when  touched,  it  is  not  fresh. 

Pork,  like  all  white  meat,  is  quick  to  taint,  and  never 
should  be  kept  long  before  cooking.  If  you  have  the  slightest 
doubt  about  pork,  it  is  best  to  reject  it,  for  unlike  other  meat 
which  may  be  quite  wholesome  and  usable,  though  not  of 
precisely  prime  quality,  pork  must  be  in  really  first  class 
condition  to  be  wholesome,  and  therefore  it  is  impossible  to 
be  too  particular  in  the  choice  of  it.  Always  if  possible  look 
at  the  tongue,  for,  as  in  beef,  this  is  a  very  fair  criterion  of 
the  condition  of  the  animal;  a  freshly  scraped  new  wooden 
skewer  run  into  the  meat  along  the  bone  is  a  good  test  of  the 
freshness  of  the  pork,  and  be  careful  especially  to  examine 
the  fat,  for  if  there  be  little  kernels  in  it  the  pork  is  "measly," 

26 


How  to  Choose  Foods 

a  very  common   disease   among  pigs,   and   one   particularly 
unwholesome  to  the  consumer. 

Pigs  for  fresh  pork  should  be  of  medium  size,  not  over 
fat,  and  under  a  year  old.  Pigs  destined  to  become  bacon  are 
usually  older  and  larger.  Sucking  pigs  should  be  small,  and 
are  best  when  about  three  weeks  old.  A  sucking  pig  should 
be  cooked  as  soon  as  possible  after  it  is  killed,  as  it  taints  very 
quickly;  unless  fresh,  no  care  in  the  cooking  will  make  the 
crackling  crisp,  as  it  should  be. 

Ham — Bacon 

Good  bacon  has  the  lean  of  a  bright  pink  and  fine  in  the 
grain,  while  the  fat  is  white  and  firm.  If  the  lean  is  high 
colored,  it  probably  has  been  over  salted  and  is  old  besides,  and 
in  consequence  will  be  hard  and  salty;  while  if  there  be  yellow 
marks  in  the  fat,  and  a  curious,  rather  musty  smell,  it  will 
have  an  unpleasant  taste.  In  choosing  a  ham  always  run  a 
clean  knife  or  skewer  in  at  the  knuckle,  and  also  at  the  center; 
if  it  comes  out  clean  and  smelling  sweet,  the  ham  is  good; 
but  if  out  of  order  the  blade  of  the  knife  will  be  smeared  and 
greasy  looking,  and  have  a  disagreeable,  strong  odor. 

Venison 

The  condition  of  venison  is  judged  chiefly  by  the  fat, 
which  should  be  a  clear  creamy  white  color,  and  close  in 
texture.  Always  try  venison  by  running  a  sharp  knife  along 
the  haunch  bone,  which  is  usually  the  first  to  turn;  if,  in 
taking  it  out,  the  knife  has  a  blackish-green  look  and  an 
unpleasant  odor,  the  meat  is  tainted,  and  unfit  for  use. 
Venison  requires  to  be  kept  a  considerable  time  before  it  is  in 
proper  condition,  and  needs  great  care  in  its  management. 
It  must  be  examined  carefully  every  day,  and  if  there  is  the 
slightest  doubt,  it  should  be  washed  in  lukewarm  milk  and 
water,  then  dried  in  clean  cloths,  and  when  perfectly  dry, 
should  be  covered  thickly  all  over  with  ground  ginger  and 
pepper;  when  required  for  use,  dust  off  the  pepper  and  ginger, 
and  wash  the  meat  in  a  little  lukewarm  water,  and  dry  it 
thoroughly.  Venison,  like  mutton,  improves  with  age,  and 
this  can  be  judged  by  the  condition  of  the  hoof,  which  in  a 
young  animal  has  a  small,  smooth  cleft,  while  in  an  old  one 
it  is  deeply  cut  and  rugged.  The  haunch  is  the  prime  joint, 
its  perfection  depending  on  the  greater  or  less  depth  of  the  fat 
on  it.  The  neck  and  shoulder  also  are  very  good.  They  are 
used  chiefly  for  stews  or  pies. 

27 


How  to  Choose  Foods 

Hares  and  Rabbits 

A  hare  when  fresh  killed  is  stifF  and  red;  when  stale,  the 
body  is  supple  and  the  flesh  in  many  parts  black.  If  the  hare 
be  old  the  ears  will  be  tough  and  dry,  and  will  not  tear  readily. 
Rabbits  may  be  judged  in  the  same  manner.  In  both,  the  claws 
should  be  smooth  and  sharp.  In  a  young  hare  the  cleft  in  the  lip 
is  narrow,  and  the  claws  are  cracked  readily  if  turned  sideways. 

Poultry 

Poultry  to  be  perfect,  should  have  just  reached  their 
full  growth  (the  only  exceptions  to  this  are  "spring  chickens," 
ducklings,  goslings,  etc.,  which  are  considered  delicacies  at 
certain  seasons);  they  should  be  plump,  firm  fleshed,  and  not 
over  fatted.  Over-fed  fowls  are  often  a  mass  of  greasy  fat, 
which  melts  in  the  cooking  and  spoils  the  flavor  of  the  bird. 
A  hen  is  at  her  best  just  before  she  begins  to  lay;  her  legs 
should  be  smooth,  her  comb  small,  bright,  and  soft.  A  young 
cock  has  the  comb  full,  bright  colored,  and  smooth,  the  legs 
smooth,  the  spurs  short,  and  in  both  the  toes  should  break 
easily  when  turned  back,  and  the  weight  of  the  birds  should 
be  great  in  proportion  to  their  size.  Contrary  to  the  practice 
with  game,  poultry  never  should  be  kept  long,  as  they  turn 
easily,  and  are  spoilt  if  the  least  high.  They  also  require 
longer  cooking,  in  proportion  to  their  size,  than  game,  and 
never  should  be  underdone.  Dark-legged  fowls  are  best  for 
roasting,  as  their  flesh  is  moister  and  better  flavored  cooked  in 
this  way  than  the  white- legged  ones,  which  from  their  greater 
daintiness  of  appearance  are  to  be  preferred  for  boiling. 

Turkeys  should  be  plump,  white-fleshed,  young,  the  legs 
plump  and  firm,  black  and  smooth,  with  (in  the  cock)  short 
spurs,  the  feet  soft  and  supple;  the  eyes  should  be  full  and  clear, 
the  neck  long,  and  the  wattles  of  a  bright  color.  A  hen  turkey 
is  best  for  boiling.  Like  fowls,  an  old  turkey  is  fit  for  nothing 
but  the  stewpan  or  the  stockpot.  Turkeys  require  hanging  for 
at  least  a  week,  though  they  must  never  be  "high"  or  "gamey." 

Geese  always  should  be  chosen  young,  plump,  and  full 
breasted,  a  white  skin,  a  yellow  smooth  bill,  the  feet  yellow 
and  pliable.  If  the  feet  and  bill  are  red  and  hard,  and  the 
skin  hairy  and  coarse,  the  bird  is  old.  Geese  should  be  hung 
for  a  few  days.  Ducks,  like  geese,  should  have  yellow,  supple 
feet;  the  breasts  full  and  hard,  and  the  skin  clear.  Wild  ducks 
should  be  fat,  the  feet  small,  reddish,  and  pliable,  the  breast 
firm  and  heavy.    If  not  fresh,  there  will  be  a  disagreeable  smell 

28 


How  to  Choose  Foods 

when  the  bill  Is  open.    The  male  is  generally  the  more  ex- 
pensive, though  the  female  is  usually  more  delicate  in  flavor. 

Pigeons  always  should  be  young  and  extremely  fresh,  and 
when  so,  they  are  plump  and  fat,  with  pliable  smooth  feet. 

Note — In  selecting  game  pluck  a  few  feathers  from  the 
under  part  of  the  leg;  if  the  skin  is  not  discolored  the  bird  is 
fresh.  The  age  may  be  known  by  placing  the  thumb  into  the 
beak,  and  holding  the  bird  up  with  the  jaw  apart;  if  it  breaks 
it  is  young;  if  not,  it  is  old,  and  requires  longer  keeping  before 
cooking  to  be  eatable. 

Guinea-fowl  are  judged  like  poultry,  but  require  hanging 
for  some  time. 

Fish 

Fish  in  good  condition  usually  is  firm  and  elastic  to  the 
touch,  eyes  bright  and  prominent,  gills  fresh  and  rosy.  If  the  fish 
is  flabby,  with  sunken  eyes,  it  either  is  stale  or  out  of  condition. 

Salmon  should  have  a  small  head  and  tail,  full  thick 
shoulders,  clean  silvery  scales,  and  its  flesh  of  a  rich  yellowish 
pink.  When  quite  fresh  there  is  a  creamy  curd  between  the 
flakes,  which  are  stiff  and  hard;  but  if  kept  this  melts,  soften- 
ing the  flesh  and  rendering  it  richer,  but  at  the  same  time  less 
digestible. 

Trout,  in  spite  of  the  difference  In  size,  may  be  judged 
by  the  same  rule  as  salmon.  However,  it  will  not  bear  keep- 
ing, deteriorating  rapidly. 

Cod,  unlike  salmon,  should  have  a  large  head  and  thick 
shoulders;  the  flesh  being  white  and  clear,  and  separating 
easily  into  large  flakes,  the  skin  clean  and  silvery.  Most 
people  consider  cod  improves  by  being  kept  for  a  day  or  two 
and  very  slightly  salted. 

Herrings  must  be  absolutely  fresh  to  be  good,  and  when 
In  this  state  their  scales  shine  like  silver.  If  kept  over  long 
their  eyes  become  suffused  with  blood. 

Mackerel  also  must  be  quite  fresh.  They  never  should  be 
bought  if  either  out  of  condition  or  season.  If  fresh  they  are 
peculiarly  beautiful  fish,  their  backs  of  an  Iridescent  blue  green 
barred  with  black,  and  their  bellies  of  a  pearly  whiteness. 

Smelts  should  be  stiff  and  silvery,  with  a  delicate  perfume 
faintly  suggestive  of  cucumber. 

29 


How  to  Choose  Foods 

Halibut  is  a  wholesome  fish.  It  should  be  middling  size, 
thick  and  of  a  white  color. 

Lobsters^  Crabs,  Prawns,  and  Shrimps  are  stiff,  and  with  the 
tails  tightly  pressed  against  the  body.  With  the  former,  weight 
is  a  great  guide,  as  the  heavier  they  are  the  better;  but  if  there 
be  the  least  sign  of  wateriness,  they  should  be  rejected  at  once. 

Vegetables 
Green  vegetables  always  are  at  their  best  when  cheapest 
and  most  plentiful.  Out  of  season  they  never  have  the  same 
flavor,  however  well  they  may  be  grown.  Excepting  arti- 
chokes, all  summer  vegetables,  as  lettuce,  peas,  beans,  and 
asparagus  should  be  cooked  as  soon  as  possible  after  gathering. 
The  freshness  of  most  vegetables  may  be  ascertained  easily 
*by  taking  a  leaf  or  a  pod  between  the  fingers.  If  fresh  this 
will  snap  off  short  and  crisp,  while  if  stale  it  will  be  limp  and 
soft.  It  is  an  economy  to  buy  winter  vegetables,  such  as 
carrots,  parsnips,  turnips,  beets,  celery,  and  potatoes  in  large 
quantities,  if  you  have  storage  room,  as  if  buried  in  sand  and 
kept  from  the  frost  they  may  be  kept  a  considerable  time. 
Onions  should  be  kept  hung  up  in  a  cool,  dry  place.  If  al- 
lowed to  sprout  the  flavor  becomes  rank  and  coarse. 

Eggs 

A  mode  of  ascertaining  the  freshness  of  eggs  is  to  hold 
them  before  a  lighted  candle  or  to  the  light,  and  if  the  egg 
looks  clear,  it  will  be  tolerably  good;  if  thick,  it  is  stale;  and 
if  there  is  a  black  spot  attached  to  the  shell,  it  is  worthless. 
No  egg  should  be  used  for  culinary  purposes  with  the  slightest 
taint  in  it,  as  it  will  render  perfectly  useless  those  with  which 
it  has  been  mixed.  Eggs  may  be  preserved,  however,  for  a 
considerable  time  without  any  further  special  precaution  than 
that  of  keeping  them  in  a  cool  place.  A  very  effective  method 
of  preserving  eggs  for  winter  use  is  to  rub  a  little  melted  Crisco 
over  each  to  close  the  pores,  and  then  to  pack  the  eggs  in 
bran,  salt  or  sawdust,  not  allowing  them  to  touch  each  other. 


30 


Methods  of  Cooking 


SHERE  are  seven  chief  methods  of  cooking  meat — 
roasting,  boiling,  baking,  stewing,  frying,  broiling 
and  poaching. 

The  first  three  are  most  suitable  for  joints 
weighing  four  pounds  or  more,  but  not  satisfac- 
tory for  smaller  pieces  which  are  liable  to  become 
hard  and  flavorless  by  the  drying  up  or  loss  of  their  juices. 

Of  the  other  three  methods,  stewing  may  be  applied 
to  fairly  large  and  solid  pieces,  but  it  is  better  for  smaller 
thin  ones,  while  frying  and  broiling  can  be  used  only  for  steaks, 
chops,  and  similar  cuts. 

Braising  and  steaming  are  combinations  and  modifi- 
cations of  these  methods. 

Roasting 

Roasting  is  one  of  the  oldest  methods  of  cooking  on  record, 
and  still  remains  the  favorite  form  of  cooking  joints  of  meat 
or  birds.  The  success  of  every  method  of  cooking  depends 
largely  upon  the  correct  management  of  the  fire.  In  roasting, 
this  is  particularly  the  case,  as  a  clear,  brisk  and  yet  steady 
fire  is  needed.  To  roast  a  joint  it  should  be  placed  before 
great  heat  for  the  first  ten  minutes  and  then  allowed  to 
cook  more  slowly.  The  great  heat  hardens  the  outside  of 
the  meat  and  keeps  in  the  juices.  If  allowed  to  cook  quickly 
all  the  time  the  meat  is  likely  to  be  tough.  The  fire  should 
be  bright  and  clear.  The  joint  should  be  basted  about  every 
ten  minutes,  as  this  helps*  to  cook  it,  keeps  it  juicy  and 
improves  the  flavor.  The  time  allowed  is  fifteen  minutes  for 
"every  pound,  twenty  minutes  over  for  beef  and  mutton;  for 
veal  and  pork  twenty  minutes  for  every  pound  and  thirty 
minutes  over. 

Oven  Roasting 

Roasting  in  the  oven  of  ordinary  coal  stoves  or  ranges 
is  not  considered  so  good  as  roasting  before  an  open  fire; 
nevertheless  it  may  be  said  safely  that  the  greatest  part  of 

31 


Methods  of  Cooking 

meat  roasting  is  done  in  close  ovens.  It  appears,  from  var- 
ious experiments  that  meat  roasted  or  baked  in  a  close  oven 
loses  rather  less  of  its  weight  than  if  roasted  by  an  open  fire. 

The  excellence  of  a  roast  depends  to  a  great  extent  upon 
the  amount  of  basting  it  receives. 

Some  cooks  season  a  joint  before  it  is  cooked,  while 
others  season  it  with  salt  and  pepper  just  before  it  is  served. 
There  is  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  which  is  the  more  cor- 
rect way  of  the  two.  Meat  of  newly  killed  animals  requires 
longer  cooking  than  meat  which  has  been  hung  for  a  time. 

In  warm  weather  joints  require  slightly  less  time  for 
roasting  than  in  cold. 

Boned  and  rolled  or  stuffed  meats  require  longer  cooking 
than  the  same  joints  would  if  neither  rolled  nor  stuffed.  The 
meat  of  young  animals  and  that  of  old  ones  requires  different 
treatment.  As  a  rule  young  flesh,  containing  less  fibrine, 
requires  longer  cooking.  White  meat,  such  as  pork,  veal  and 
lamb,  always  should  be  well  cooked  and  never  must  be  served 
rare.  The  exact  time  and  process  of  roasting  must  be  left  to 
the  good  management  of  the  cook,  who  must  be  guided  by 
circumstances  and  conditions.  The  crook's  business  is  to 
serve  the  joint  as  full  of  nourishing  qualities  as  possible. 
Though  roasting  is  considered  one  of  the  easiest  and  most 
simple  processes  of  cookery,  it  really  requires  quite  as  much 
attention  to  obtain  perfect  results  as  is  necessary  to  prepare 
so-called  "made"  dishes,  the  recognized  test  for  good  cooks. 

Boiling 

Boiling  (of  fresh  meat). — This  is  cookery  by  immersion  in 
boiling  liquid,  which  after  a  few  minutes  is  reduced  to  simmer- 
ing. The  object  of  the  high  temperature  at  first  is  to  harden 
the  surface  albumen  and  so  seal,  the  pores  and  prevent  the 
escape  of  the  juices.  If  continued  too  long,  this  degree  of 
heat  would  tend  to  toughen  the  joint  throughout;  after  the 
first  few  minutes,  therefore,  the  heat  must  be  reduced  to 
about  180°  F.  The  pan  used  for  boiling  meat  should  be  only 
JTJSt  large  enough  to  hold  the  joint,  and  the  quantity  of  liquid 
no  more  than  is  required  to  cover  it.  For  the  boiling  of  salt 
meat  the  general  rule  of  first  hardening  the  surface  is  not 
to  be  followed.  The  salting  of  meat  withdraws  a  large  pro- 
portion of  its  juices,  while  at  the  same  time  the  salt  hardens 
the  fibres,  and  this  hardness  would  be  intensified  by  extreme 
heat.     Very  salt  meat  sometimes  is  soaked  in  cold  water  to 

32 


Methods  of  Cooking 

extract  some  of  the  salt,  but  whether  this  is  done  or  not, 
the  rule  for  boiling  salt  meat  is  to  immerse  it  in  cold  or  tepid 
water  and  bring  slowly  to  boiling  point;  boil  for  five  minutes 
to  seal  the  pores  and  prevent  any  further  loss  of  juice,  then 
reduce  to  180°  F.,  and  maintain  a  uniform  temperature  till 
the  meat  is  cooked.  Salt  meat  takes  longer  to  cook  than  fresh 
meat,  and  the  saltness  may  be  qualified  by  boiling  vegetables 
with  the  meat,  turnips  especially  being  useful  for  this  purpose. 

Baking 

The  actual  differences  between  roasting  and  baking  are 
not  great,  the  terms  being  frequently  interchanged.  Meat 
loses  rather  less  weight  when  baked  than  when  roasted,  but 
the  flavor  of  meat  is  inferior  and  less  developed.  The  heat 
of  an  oven  being  steadier,  baking  takes  somewhat  less  time 
than  roasting.  In  a  gas  oven  having  an  open  floor  the  current 
of  air  is  not  impeded,  and  such  baking  very  nearly  approaches 
roasting,  and  the  flavor  generally  is  acknowledged  to  be  the 
same. 

Stewing 

Stewing  is  cooking  slowly  with  a  small  quantity  of  liquid 
in  a  covered  vessel.  The  method  is  specially  suitable  for  the 
coarser  and  cheaper  parts  of  meat,  which  are  rendered 
tender  without  loss  of  their  juices.  The  usual  plan  is  to  make 
a  gravy  flavored  and  colored  to  suit  the  stew,  and  after  the 
ingredients  are  well  blended  and  cooked  to  lay  the  meat  in 
the  boiling  liquid.  After  about  two  minutes  boiling,  the 
temperature  is  reduced  to  simmering,  about  160°  F.,  a  lower 
temperature  than  that  required  for  a  large  joint  of  "boiled" 
meat.  The  time  depends  greatly  on  the  quality  of  the  meat, 
but  none  will  stew  satisfactorily  in  less  than  from  one  and  a 
half  to  two  hours,  and  the  longer  allowance  is  to  be  preferred. 

Broiling 

Broiling,  sometimes  called  grilling,  is  cooking  by  the  direct 
action  of  fire  brought  almost  into  contact  with  the  meat.  The 
outer  surface  is  burned  or  seared,  the  albumen  hardened 
and  the  juices,  which  have  a  tendency  to  escape  on  the  side 
turned  from  the  heat,  are  retained  in  the  meat  by  frequent 
turning.  The  fire  for  broiling  must  be  very  clear,  intensely 
hot  and  high  in  the  grate.  The  utensil  required  for  broiling 
is  a  gridiron,  the  bars  of  which  are  greased  and  heated  to 

33 


Methods  of  Cooking 

prevent  sticking  and  subsequent  tearing  of  the  meat.  The 
gridiron  is  laid  quite  close  over  the  heat,  so  that  the  lower 
surface  is  dried  and  hardened  at  once. 

The  meat  must  be  turned  at  very  short  intervals  before 
the  juices  have  been  driven  from  the  heat  to  the  opposite  sur- 
face. If  once  allowed  to  reach  the  surface,  they  will  be  thrown 
off  in  turning  and  lost,  the  meat  being  correspondingly  im- 
poverished. By  constant  turning  the  juices  are  kept  moving 
backwards  and  forwards,  and  the  meat  remains  moist  and 
full  of  flavor.  Each  side  should  be  exposed  to  the  fire  about 
three  times,  and  it  is  not  desirable  to  use  meat  less  than  one 
inch  or  more  than  one  and  a  half  to  two  inches  thick  for  the 
purpose. 

The  thinner  pieces  should  have  even  greater  heat  applied 
than  the  thick  ones,  as  the  longer  thin  ones  are  exposed  to 
the  fire  the  more  dry  and  tasteless  they  become,  while  the 
thicker  pieces  may  be  slightly  withdrawn  after  thoroughly 
hardening  the  surface  and  cooked  rather  more  slowly  that 
the  heat  may  penetrate  to  the  center.  The  frequent  turning 
must  be  continued,  or  the  juices  will  reach  the  hardened  outer 
fibres,  soften  them,  and  escape. 

If  a  double  broiler  is  used  the  turning  is  managed  easily, 
but  with  a  single  gridiron  care  must  be  taken  not  to  puncture 
the  meat  by  using  a  fork.  Steak  tongs  are  made  for  the  pur- 
pose of  lifting  and  turning  broiled  meat,  but  a  spoon  or  a 
spoon  and  knife  will  answer.  A  single  rim  of  fat  on  the  chop 
or -steak  will  tend  to  keep  the  edge  moist  and  baste  the  meat, 
but  too  much  will  cause  flame  to  rise  in  continuous  jet, 
making  the  surface  smoky.  If  there  is  absolutely  no  fat  on 
the  piece  to  be  broiled,  morsels  of  finely  chopped  suet  may  be 
occasionally  thrown  into  the  fire,  so  the  sudden  spurt  of 
flame  from  this  source  leaves  a  deposit  of  fat  on  the  meat 
which  improves  the  flavor,  and,  without  softening  the  albu- 
men, prevents  its  becoming  uneatably  hard  and  dry. 

Frying 

Frying  may  be  looked  on  as  a  derivative  of  broiling,  and 
passes  by  easy  stages,  from  broiling  on  a  slightly  greased  metal 
plate,  or  sautSing  in  a  shallow  pan  in  a  small  quantity  of 
Crisco,  to  cooking  by  actual  immersion  into  a  bath  of  hot  fat. 
In  a  house  where  small  and  delicately  made  dishes  are  in  de- 
mand, and  where  variety  in  the  re-dressing  of  cold  meats  has 

34 


Methods  of  Cooking 

to  be  studied,  this  frying  in  deep  fat  is  one  of  the  cook's  most 
needed  accomplishments.  Though  exceedingly  easy  to  do 
well,  it  is  also  exceedingly  easy  to  do  badly. 

Deep  fat  frying,  which  means  submerging  the  food  in  the 
fat,  is  far  superior  to  shallow  or  saute  frying,  and  can  be  done 
most  economically  with  Crisco.  Little  is  absorbed  by  the 
foods,  and  the  Crisco  does  not  take  up  the  odor  or  flavor  of 
the  food  which  is  fried  in  it.  This  characteristic  makes  it 
possible  to  use  Crisco  for  frying  one  article  of  food  after 
another. 

Use  plenty  of  Crisco  for  frying.  The  temperature  of  the 
hot  Crisco  then  will  be  but  little  lowered  when  the  food  is 
added.  There  is  little  absorption  and  what  is  left  may  be 
used  for  all  frying,  merely  by  straining  out  food  particles 
after  each  frying. 

Sufficient  Crisco  should  be  put  into  the  pan  to  fill  it 
about  two-thirds  full.  From  two  to  three  pounds  for  a  pan 
eight  inches  in  diameter  will  not  be  too  much.  Into  this  pan 
or  kettle  a  wire  "frying-basket"  should  fit  quite  loosely,  the 
basket  measuring  quite  an  inch  less  across  the  top  than  the 
pan. 

Let  Crisco  get  hot  gradually  in  the  pan.  Do  not  put 
into  an  already  hot  container.  No  fat  should  be  treated  in 
this  manner. 

Do  Not  Wait  for  Crisco  to  Smoke 

Heat  Crisco  until  a  crumb  of  bread  becomes  a  golden 
brown  in 

60  seconds  for  raw  dough  mixtures,  as  crullers,  fritters, 
etc. 

40  seconds  for  cooked  mixtures,  as  croquettes,  codfish 
balls,  etc. 

20  seconds  for  French  fried  potatoes. 

Seconds  may  be  counted  thus:  one  hundred  and  one, 
one  hundred  and  two,  etc. 

The  fat  may  be  tested  also  by  dropping  into  it  a  little 
piece  of  the  article  to  be  cooked.  When  it  rises  to  the  top, 
bubbles  vigorously  and  browns  quickly,  the  fat  is  hot  enough. 

When  prepared,  the  foods  must  be  placed  in  the  basket, 
not  too  many  at  a  time  or  too  close  together,  and  then  lowered 

35 


Methods  of  Cooking 

gently  into  the  fat.  They  generally  will  sink  to  the  bottom 
for  a  minute  or  two,  and  only  float  when  they  have  begun  to 
brown.  When  a  bright  golden  brown,  take  up  the  basket  and 
let  the  fried  things  drain  in  it,  over  the  hot  fat,  for  a  few 
seconds.  Then  take  them  out  gently  one  by  one,  and  lay 
them  on  a  sheet  of  brown  or  kitchen  paper. 

The  draining  over  the  pan  is  one  of  the  principal  things  to 
attend  to;  if  this  be  neglected,  the  fat  will  cling  about  the 
fried  things,  making  them  both  look  and  taste  greasy,  whereas 
if  properly  drained  in  the  basket  to  begin  with,  they  will 
afterwards  scarcely  mark  the  paper.  When,  as  is  sometimes 
the  case,  no  frying  basket  is  used,  each  thing  fried  should  be 
drained  between  a  spoon  and  the  edge  of  the  pan. 

To  Clarify 

It  is  economy  to  use  three  pounds  in  the  kettle,  clarify- 
ing the  fat  when  it  is  put  away.  To  clarify  Crisco,  take  that 
which  has  been  used  for  deep  frying  and  when  it  has  cooled, 
but  not  solidified,  strain  through  a  double  thickness  of  cheese 
cloth,  replace  kettle  on  stove,  drop  several  slices  of  potato 
into  the  Crisco  and  reheat.  When  the  potatoes  are  golden 
brown,  take  out  and  pour  the  Crisco  back  into  the  tin.  With 
this  little  care,  fish,  oysters,  onions,  chops,  fritters,  dough- 
nuts, etc.,  may  be  fried  over  and  over  again  in  the  same  Crisco. 

The  dry  or  saute  method  of  frying  is  less  satisfactory, 
in  that  it  is  difficult  even  after  much  practice  to  produce  a 
uniformly  colored  surface.  A  small  quantity  of  fat  only  is 
needed,  and  where  the  fat,  i.  e.,  the  heat,  ends,  a  crack  is 
formed  in  the  outer  coat,  through  which  flavor  escapes  and 
fat  enters;  the  appearance  also  is  rendered  unsightly.  Flat 
fish  can  be  fried  fairly  well  by  this  method,  or,  indeed,  almost 
any  thin  substance,  as  thin  edges  are  not  aff^ected  in  this  way. 
For  pancakes  and  other  articles  of  similar  nature  it  is  the  best 
method.  It  rarely  is  possible  to  use  the  fat  from  the  dry 
method  a  second  time,  except  for  dishes  of  the  same  kind,  as 
the  fat  always  is  more  or  less  flavored  by  the  food  cooked  in  it. 
The  most  digestible  fat  for  frying  and  the  best  for  results 
undoubtedly  is  Crisco. 

Steaming 

Steaming  is  a  process  very  similar  to  boiling,  for  it  is 
cooking  in  the  heated  vapor  of  water.     This  practice  as  a 

36 


Methods  of  Cooking 

means  of  cookery  is  largely  adopted  in  hotels,  clubs,  schools 
and  hospitals,  and  other  large  institutions;  also  frequently 
applied  in  ordinary  home  cookery  for  particular  articles  of 
food  requiring  a  very  slow  process  of  cooking.  An  ordinary 
kitchen  steamer,  with  a  close-fitting  lid  is  generally  all  that 
is  required  for  simple  household  cookery  on  a  small  scale. 
The  articles  of  food  which  are  to  be  steamed  are  prepared 
in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  for  boiling.  Many  puddings, 
some  meats,  and  some  vegetables  are  considered  better  if 
cooked  by  steam,  and  inasmuch  as  the  process  of  cooking  is 
a  very  slow  one,  there  is  no  fear  of  the  food  being  destroyed  by 
too  fierce  a  heat,  as  the  temperature  in  steaming  never  reaches 
beyond  212°  F.  Fish,  meat  and  poultry  cooked  by  steam 
are  as  a  rule  tender,  full  of  gravy  and  digestible.  By  steaming, 
watery  vegetables  are  made  drier;  tough  meats  are  softened 
and  made  tender;  while  farinaceous  mixtures  and  puddings 
develop  a  totally  different  flavor  when  baked  or  fried. 

Braising 

Braising  is  a  combination  of  roasting  and  stewing  small 
joints  of  meats  in  a  shallow  stewpan.  It  is  a  favorite  method 
of  cooking  with  the  French,  and  is  supposed  to  bring  out  an 
unusually  fine  flavor  and  aroma.  The  pan  in  which  a  braise 
is  to  be  made  always  should  be  lined  with  slices  of  bacon, 
carrot,  onions  and  herbs,  upon  which  the  meat  is  placed.  It 
usually  is  moistened  with  stock  or  stock  and  wine.  The  more 
delicate  meats,  such  as  sweetbreads,  fillets,  fowls  and  turkeys 
sometimes  are  covered  with  buttered  paper;  this  is  done  to 
prevent  the  heat  from  the  top  of  the  pan  scorching  or  impart- 
ing too  much  of  a  roast  flavor  to  the  meats  which  are  to  be 
braised.  Occasional  basting  during  the  process  of  this  method 
of  cooking  is  essential.  When  done,  the  meat  is  taken  up,  the 
fat  removed  from  the  vegetables  and  gravy,  which  latter  is 
then  reduced,  strained  and  blended  with  some  kind  of  gravy 
or  thin  sauce. 

Poaching  and  Marinating 

Poaching  is  the  name  usually  given  to  the  process  of 
cooking  an  article  by  placing  it  for  a  few  minutes  in  boiling 
water.  Marinating  or  pickling  is  a  process  with  a  formidable 
name  with  a  simple  meaning.     To  marinate  simply  is  to  soak 

37 


Methods  of  Cooking 

meat  in  a  mixture  for  some  hours,  or  even  days,  with  the 
idea  of  improving  its  flavor,  of  softening  its  fibres  and  making 
it  tender.  Vinegar,  oil,  pepper  and  salt  are  mixed  together 
and  the  meat  packed  in  the  mixture;  sometimes  a  sliced 
onion  and  herbs  are  added.  The  meat,  of  course,  should  be 
wiped  first,  but  not  washed. 

Cooking  in  Earthenware 

Stone  or  earthenware  cooking  appliances  are  used  to 
very  great  advantage  for  various  forms  of  preparing  food. 
For  the  homely  pot-au-feu  the  French  housewife  has  used 
fireproof  earthenware  dishes  for  generations,  and  does  so 
today.  But  besides  soups,  various  savory  dishes,  and  all 
sorts  of  stews  are  cooked  in  stoneware  pots.  Indeed,  so 
much  has  this  form  of  cookery  come  into  fashion  that  many 
dishes  are  sent  to  table  in  the  pots  in  which  they  are  cooked. 
Cooking  in  stoneware  has  no  equal  where  slow  cooking  is 
aimed  at,  and  there  are  many  dishes  which  one  would  do 
well  to  refrain  from  attempting  unless  cooked  in  this  fashion. 
These  cooking  pots  are  inexpensive,  and  certain  foods  taste 
decidedly  better  if  cooked  in  this  way.  For  braising,  pot 
roasting,  or  stewing  fruit  and  other  articles  which  need  to  be 
cooked  slowly  under  close  cover,  the  application  of  a  moderate, 
even  heat  produces  far  better  results  than  if  quick  heat  is 
applied.  For  such  cases  the  use  of  earthenware  cooking  pots 
is  recommended. 


38 


Time  Table  for  Cooking 


Baking 


Beef,  loin  or  ribs,  rare,  per  lb 8  to  10  minutes 

Beef,  loin  or  ribs,  well  done,  per  lb 12  to  16  minutes 

Beef,  ribs,  rolled,  rare 12  to  15  minutes 

Beef,  ribs,  rolled,  well  done 15  to  18  minutes 

Beef,  fillet,  rare 20  to  30  minutes 

Beef,  fillet,  well  done 60  minutes 

Mutton,  leg,  rare,  per  lb 10  minutes 

Mutton,  leg,  well  done,  per  lb 14  minutes 

Mutton,  forequarter,  stuffed,  per  lb 15  to  25  minutes 

Lamb,  well  done,  per  lb 15  to  20  minutes 

Veal,  well  done,  per  lb 18  to  22  minutes 

Pork,  well  done,  per  lb 20  minutes 

Venison,  rare,  per  lb 10  minutes 

Chicken,  per  lb 15  to  20  minutes 

Turkey,  nine  lbs 3  hours 

Goose,  nine  lbs 2^  hours 

Duck,  domestic 1  to  \]/^  hours 

Duck,  wild 20  to  30  minutes 

Grouse 25  to  30  minutes 

Ham 4  to  6  hours 

Fish,  3  or  4  lbs 45  to  60  minutes 

Small  fish  and  fillets 20  minutes 

Beans  with  pork 6  to  8  hours 

Bread,  white  loaf 45  to  60  minutes 

Graham  loaf 35  to  45  minutes 

Baking  powder  biscuits 12  to  15  minutes 

Gems 25  to  30  minutes 

Quick  doughs 8  to  15  minutes 

Cookies 8  to  10  minutes 

Gingerbread 20  to  30  minutes 

Sponge  cake 45  to  60  minutes 

Cake,  layer 20  to  30  minutes 

Cake,  loaf 40  to  60  minutes 

Fruit  cake 2  to  3  hours 

Cake,  wedding 3  to  5  hours 

Cakes,  small 15  to  25  minutes 

Batter  puddings 35  to  45  minutes 

Pies 30  to  50  minutes 

Tarts 15  to  20  minutes 

Patties IS  to  25  minutes 

Vol-au-vent .  . .« 50  to  60  minutes 

Muffins,  yeast 30  minutes 

Muffins,  baking  powder 20  to  25  minutes 

Indian  pudding 2  to  3  hours 

39 


Time  Table  for  Cooking 

Rice  or  tapioca  pudding 1  hour 

Bread  puddings 45  to  60  minutes 

Scallop  dishes 15  to  20  minutes 

Custard 35  to  45  minutes 

Custard  in  cups 20  to  25  minutes 

Boiling 

MEATS 2  to  6  hours 

Corned  meat 4  to  6  hours 

Ox  tongue 3  to  4  hours 

Ham,  12  to  14  lbs 4  to  5  hours 

Turkey,  10  lbs 3  to  3}4  hours 

Fowl,  4  to  5  lbs 2  to  3  hours 

Chicken,  3  lbs 1  to  l>i  hours 

Fish,  2  to  5  lbs 30  to  45  minutes 

Lobster 25  to  30  minutes 

Cod,  3  to  5  lbs 20  to  30  minutes 

Haddock,  3  to  5  lbs 20  to  30  minutes 

Halibut,  thick  piece,  per  lb 15  minutes 

Salmon,  thick  piece,  per  lb 10  to  15  minutes 

Asparagus 20  to  30  minutes 

Beans,  shell  or  string 1  to  3  hours 

Beets,  young 50  minutes 

Beets,  old 3  to  4  hours 

Brussels  sprouts 15  to  20  minutes 

Cabbage 35  to  60  minutes 

Carrots 1  hour 

Cauliflower 25  to  30  minutes 

Corn. 12  to  20  minutes 

Macaroni 20  to  35  minutes 

Turnips 30  to  45  minutes 

Onions , 45  to  60  minutes 

Parsnips 30  to  45  minutes 

Spinach 15  to  20  minutes 

Tomatoes,  stewed 15  to  20  minutes 

Rice 20  to  30  minutes 

Broiling 

Steak,  1  inch  thick 4  to  10  minutes 

Steak,  l}4  inches  thick 8  to  12  minutes 

Lamb  or  mutton  chops 6  to  10  minutes 

Chicken 20  minutes 

Quails 8  minutes 

Squabs 10  to  12  minutes 

Shad,  whitefish  and  blueiish 15  to  20  minutes 

Fish  slices 12  to  15  minutes 

Liver 4  to    5  minutes 

Frying 

Smelts  and  other  small  fish 3  to  5  minutes 

Breaded  chops 5  to  8  minutes 

Potatoes,  raw 4  to  8  minutes 

Fish  balls  and  croquettes 1  minute 

Muffins,  fritters,  and  doughnuts 3  to  5  minutes 

40 


Time  Table  for  Cooking 

Weights  and  Measures 

27>^  grains 1  dram 

16  drams 1  ounce 

16  ounces 1  pound 

1  teaspoonful 60  drops 

3  teaspoonfuls 1    tablespoonful 

4  tablespoonfuls 1  wineglass,  yi  gill,  or  }4  cup 

16  tablespoonfuls 1  cup 

2  gills -« 1  cup 

2  cups 1  pint 

2  pints 1  quart 

4  quarts 1  gallon 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 1  ounce 

2  tablespoonfuls  salt 1  ounce 

2  tablespoonfuls  sugar 1  ounce 

4  tablespoonfuls  flour 1  ounce 

1  tablespoonful  liquid }^  ounce 

1  square  chocolate 1  ounce 

y^  cupful  chopped  nut  meats  (blanched) 1  ounce 

1  cupful  currants yi  pound 

1  cupful  crumbs ^  pound 

4y3  cupfuls  coffee 1  pound 

3}4  cupfuls  confectioners'  sugar 1  pound 

4)4  cupfuls  graham  flour 1  pound 

lyi  cupfuls  oatmeal 1  pound 

5  cupfuls  rolled  oats 1  pound 

4^3  cupfuls  rye  meal 1  pound 

lyi  cupfuls  rice 1  pound 

l^i  cupfuls  dry  beans 1  pound 

2  cupfuls  granulated  sugar 1  pound 

2^3  cupfuls  brown  sugar 1  pound 

2^  cupfuls  powdered  sugar 1  pound 

1  cupful  (volume) 8  ounces 

1  cupful  water 8^  ounces 

1  pint  butter ^ 1  pound 

1  quart  flour 1  pound 

10  small  or  9  medium  eggs 1  pound 

All  materials  are  measured  level,  i.  e.,  by  filling  spoon  or  cup  more 
than  full  and  leveling  with  a  case  knife. 

To  measure  meal,  flour,  sugar  and  similar  ingredients,  sift  lightly 
into  the  measure,  then  level. 

Standard  measuring  cups  made  of  tin,  aluminum  or  glass  holding 
half  a  pint  always  should  be  used.  Coffee  and  teacups  vary  so  much  that 
correct  proportions  can  not  be  obtained  by  using  them. 

To  measure  a  spoonful  of  dry  material,  fill  the  spoon  heaping,  then 
level.  To  measure  a  half-spoonful,  fill  and  level  the  spoon,  then  divide 
in  half  lengthways;   for   quarter-spoonfuls,  divide  the  halves  crossways. 

Use  level  measurements  in  all  recipes  in  this  book. 


41 


The  ^rt  of  Carving 


^ARVING  is  an  art,  and  one  which  anybody, 
with  a  knowledge  of  a  few  general  directions,  can 
acquire  easily. 

A  proper  set  of  carving  tools  is  almost  indis- 
pensable, and  should  comprise:  a  good  thin, 
sharp-bladed  knife,  a  solid  two  or  three  pronged 
fork,  and  a  pair  of  carving  scissors.  Anything  that  needs  to 
be  carved  at  table  should  be  placed  on  a  dish  sufficiently- 
large  to  allow  the  joint  to  be  turned  without  moving  the  dish 
from  its  position.  The  dish  should  be  placed  close  in  front 
of  the  carver.  Such  joints  as  beef,  veal  and  ham  should  be 
cut  very  thin;  while  lamb,  mutton,  and  oork  should  be  cut  a 
trifle  thicker. 

To  carve  a  fowl,  begin  by  sticking  the  fork  into  the  pinion 
and  draw  it  towards  the  leg;  and  then,  passing  the  knife 
underneath,  take  off  the  wing  at  the  joint.  Next  slip  the 
knife  between  leg  and  body,  to  cut  through  the  joint;  and 
with  the  fork  turn  leg  back,  and  joint  will  give  way.  Then 
take  off  other  wing  and  leg.  After  legs  are  taken  oflF,  enter 
knife  into  the  top  of  breast,  and  cut  under  merrythought  or 
wishbone  so  as  to  loosen  it,  lifting  it  with  the  fork.  After- 
wards cut  slices  from  both  sides  of  breast.  Next,  take  off 
collarbones,  which  lie  on  each  side  of  wishbone  and  then  sep- 
arate side  bones  from  the  back.  The  breast  and  wings  are* 
considered  the  most  delicate  parts;  the  back  as  the  least  desir- 
able, generally  is  left  on  platter. 

A  turkey  is  carved  in  same  manner,  except  that  the  legs 
and  wings,  being  larger,  are  separated  at  lower  joint.  Lower 
part  of  leg  (or  drumstick)  being  hard,  tough,  and  stringy, 
usually  is  allowed  to  remain  on  platter.  First  cut  off  wing,  leg, 
and  breast  from  one  side;  then  turn  turkey  round  and  cut  them 
off  from  the  other. 

To  carve  a  goose,  separate  leg  from  body  by  putting  fork 
into  small  end  of  leg,  pressing  it  close  to  body,  and  then  pass- 
ing knife  under,  and  turning  leg  back  as  you  cut  through 
joint.  To  take  off  wing,  put  fork  into  the  small  end  of  wing, 
and  press  it  closely  to  body,  then  slip  knife  under  and  sep- 
arate the  joint.     Next,  cut  under  wishbone  and  take  it  off, 

42 


The  Art  of  Carving 

and  cut  slices  from  breast.  Then  turn  and  dismember  the  other 
side.  Take  off  upper  side  bones  next  to  wings,  then  two  lower 
side  bones.  The  breast  and  legs  of  a  goose  are  considered 
the  most  choice.     If  a  goose  is  old,  there  is  no  fowl  so  tough. 

Quails  merely  are  split  down  the  back,  as  also  are  pigeons, 
giving  a  half  to  each  person. 

To  carve  loin  of  muttony  a  portion  is  cut  through,  beginning 
at  the  best  end.  If  kidney  be  in  it,  a  slice  should  be 
served  as  far  as  it  will  go  to  each  portion.  Care  must  be  taken 
that  the  bone  is  well  jointed.  The  butcher  chops  the  loin 
between  each  vertebra.  When  big  mutton  is  carved  it  gives 
a  large  chop,  oftentimes  more  than  the  amount  desired,  but 
a  chop  cannot  be  divided  without  waste,  or  one  portion  being 
all  the  inferior  end.  It  is  therefore  a  good  plan  to  joint  a  loin 
of  mutton  with  a  small  meat  saw,  cutting  any  thickness 
desired.  In  this  case  the  actual  bone  will  often  have  to  be 
sawn  through.  The  result  will  be  more  economical,  and  the 
servings  more  agreeable.  The  loin  also  can  be  boned  entirely, 
stuffed  or  not,  as  preferred,  the  flap  end  folded  and  fastened 
over  the  fillet  portion.  Then  the  meat  can  be  carved  across 
any  thickness. 

To  carve  leg  of  mutton,  stand  joint  the  inner  part  of 
the  leg  uppermost  and  cut  across  center  to  bone,  towards 
carver,  then  cut  rather  thick  slices  on  either  side.  To  serve 
the  meat  equally,  unless  any  special  part  is  desired,  a  por- 
tion of  the  knuckle  is  served  with  a  slice  of  the  thick  end. 
The  prime  fat  is  the  kernel  of  fat  at  the  thick  end. 

To  carve  fore  quarter  of  mutton  or  lamb.  The  forequarter  of 
mutton  usually  is  not  served  whole  unless  the  mutton  be 
very  small.  The  forequarter  of  lamb  frequently  is  served 
whole.  Before  cooking  it  must  be  jointed  through  the  chine 
of  bone  at  the  back,  to  enable  this  portion  being  served  in 
chops,  twice  across  the  breastbones  the  entire  length,  and  at 
short  intervals  at  the  edge  of  the  breast.  Before  serving  it  is 
usual  to  separate  the  shoulder  by  pressing  the  fork  in  by  the 
knuckle,  then  passing  knife  round  shoulder,  crossing  about 
center  of  joint,  raising  shoulder  without  cutting  too  much 
meat  ofi^  breast.  Leave  shoulder  in  position  on  joint;  a  second 
dish  is  sent  to  table  on  which  to  lay  it  while  the  other  part  is 
being  carved. 

To  carve  rabbit  or  hare.  In  either  case  first  separate  legs 
and  shoulders;  then  cut  the  back  part  across,  into  two  parts. 

43 


The  Art  of  Caning 

This  is  accomplished  best  by  inserting  the  knife  into  joint, 
and  raising  up  the  back  by  means  of  the  fork.  The  back  or 
fillet  part  is  considered  the  best  portion  of  a  hare  or  rabbit. 

To  carve  sirloin  of  beef,  a  sirloin  should  be  cut  into  thin 
slices  with  a  sharp,  firm  cut  from  end  to  end  of  the  joint. 
At  the  upper  portion  the  cut  should  be  clean  and  even; 
then  use  point  of  knife  to  loosen  slices  from  bones.  In  carv- 
ing undercut,  remove  superfluous  fat,  and  cut  slices  from  end 
to  end  in  same  manner  as  upper  portion.  Be  careful  always 
to  cut  down  straight  to  the  bone  of  a  sirloin  or  rib  of  beef;  by 
so  doing  you  will  not  spoil  appearance  of  joint,  and  what 
remains  will  look  tidy. 

To  carve  ham.^  Ham  should  be  cut  through  to  the  bone 
first  from  center  or  near  thin  end.  Slices  must  be  cut  thin. 
Always  commence  cutting  from  upper  side.  The  fairest  way 
by  far,  so  as  to  serve  fat  and  lean  evenly,  is  to  begin  cutting 
from  center  of  thickest  part,  and  to  cut  thin  circular  slices; 
by  this  means  the  flavor  of  the  ham  is  far  better,  and  it 
will  prove  to  be  the  more  economical  way  of  serving. 

To  carve  ox-tongue.  Commence  cutting  from  middle  of 
tongue;  cut  slices  not  too  thin  and  take  them  from  each  side 
being  careful  not  to  cut  slices  through  to  bottom  part  of 
tongue.  Extreme  end  of  the  tip  and  the  lower  part  of  tongue 
generally  are  used  up  for  chopping  in  salpicons,  etc.  A  little 
of  the  fat  should  be  put  on  each  plate.  When  rolled  tongue  is 
served  it  must  be  cut  horizontally  into  rather  thin  slices. 

To  carve  fish.  A  silver  slicer  or  trowel  should  be  used  for 
this  purpose;  a  steel  knife  applied  to  fish  often  spoils  the 
delicacy  of  its  flavor.  Great  care  must  be  taken  to  prevent 
breaking  the  flakes,  which  ought  to  be  kept  as  entire  as 
possible.  Short-grained  fish,  such  as  salmon,  etc.,  should  be 
cut  lengthwise,  not  crosswise. 


44 


Six  Hundred  and  Fifteen 
Tested  Recipes 


44 


Calendar  of  Dinners^'* 


by  Marion  Harris  Neil 


,>"'r,^ 


<SOU19><S 


N  economical  housewife  may  supply  good 
gravy  and  thick  soups  at  very  little,  if 
any,  addition  to  the  weekly  expenses,  as 
soups  are  an  excellent  method  of  using  up  scraps 
and  bones  from  joints  and  vegetables  that  other- 
wise are  wasted.  Soup,  if  taken  as  the  primary 
course  of  a  substantial  dinner,  if  well  flavored 
and  warm,  acts  as  a  stimulant  in  the  stomach, 
exciting  the  gastric  glands,  and  generally  enabling  that  organ 
to  perform  its  functions  more  easily.  For  this  object  the  soup 
should  be  thin  and  not  too  much  of  it  partaken,  otherwise  it 
dilutes  the  digestive  juices  too  much.  If  it  is  to  form  the 
chief  part  of  the  meal,  the  soup  will  be  more  nutritious  if 
thickened,  especially  so,  if  pulse  —  i.  e.,  peas,  beans,  and 
lentils  —  is  used  as  the  thickening  medium. 

Stock  is  the  liquid  in  which  meat,  bones,  or  vegetables 
have  been  cooked,  and  which  contains  an  extract  from  these 
substances.  It  is  used  for  soups,  sauces,  and  gravies.  Fresh 
or  cooked  bones  or  meat  may  be  used.  A  stock  pot  may  be 
kept  on  the  stove,  into  which  are  put  any  scraps  of  meat, 
bones,  gristle,  or  vegetable;  at  the  end  of  the  day  it  is  strained, 
and  all  fat  taken  off.  Bones  and  meat  for  stock  must  be  broken 
into  small  pieces.  Cold  water  should  be  used,  and  a  little 
salt  to  extract  the  nutriment.  The  whole  must  be  brought 
slowly  to  the  boiling  point;  then,  the  temperature  lowered,  the 
fat  and  scum  taken  off.  When  wanted  for  clear  soups  the 
vegetables  should  be  cleaned,  but  not  cut  up,  or  with  the 
long  cooking  they  may  mash  and  thicken  the  soup.  In  hot 
weather  it  is  better  to  leave  out  the  vegetables,  as  the  stock 
turns  sour  more  quickly  if  vegetables  have  been  used  in  its 
preparation.  They  can  be  cooked  separately  and  added 
when  using  the  stock. 

The  soup  should  simmer  for  five  or  six  hours  to  extract 
the  gelatinous  matters.  If  the  stock  is  skimmed  occasionally 
it  will  be  much  clearer.    Keep  the  lid  on  the  stock  pot  to  pre- 


Soups 

vent  loss  by  evaporation.  The  bones  can  be  cooked  again 
next  day  for  a  second  stock,  but  the  vegetables  must  be  taken 
out.  Care  must  be  taken  that  nothing  doubtful  in  freshness  be 
put  into  the  stock  pot.  Meat  and  bones  should  be  well  wiped 
with  a  damp  cloth  before  using  them.  If  onions  be  put  in  the 
soup  unpeeled,  simply  washed  and  the  root  end  cut  off,  they 
will  help  to  color  the  soup.  When  using  eggs  for  other  dishes, 
if  the  shells  be  washed  before  breaking  them  and  added  to 
the  stock  pot  they  will  help  to  clear  the  soup.  For  clear  soups 
care  must  be  taken  that  nothing  of  a  floury  nature  be  added 
to  the  stock  pot.  Stock  always  should  be  strained  before 
cooling.  Never  allow  it  to  stand  in  stock  pot  all  night.  Clear 
gravy  soup  consists  of  the  extractives,  flavoring  matters,  and 
gelatine  of  meat  and  bones. 

Consomme  is  a  good  stock  made  from  beef,  veal,  and  often 
fowl,  and  flavored  with  vegetables,  cooled,  freed  from  fat. 
It  is  clarified  with  whites  and  shells  of  eggs,  and  chopped 
raw  lean  beef,  and  strained  through  a  cloth.  It  should  be 
brilliantly  clear  and  of  a  pale  brown  color.  Any  fat  floating 
on  the  stock  may  be  removed  by  passing  a  piece  of  kitchen  or 
blotting  paper  over  the  surface.  Soup  left  from  a  meal  will 
keep  better  if  strained  from  the  vegetables  that  have  been 
served  in  it.  In  hot  weather,  stock  left  over  must  be  boiled 
each  day,  and  poured  into  a  clean  basin  to  prevent  its  turning 
sour.  In  warm  weather,  soups  with  milk  in  their  composition 
should  have  a  pinch  of  baking  soda  added. 

Thickenings  for  soup  consist  usually  of  yolks  of  eggs  and 
cream  beaten  together  in  a  basin,  the  boiling  soup  poured  on 
slowly,  stirring  well  at  the  same  time.  Soups  thus  thickened 
should  not  be  allowed  to  boil  again,  otherwise  they  will 
curdle.  Instead  of  eggs  and  cream,  cornstarch  and  milk  may  be 
used  to  thicken  the  soup. 

Asparagus  Soup 

40  heads  asparagus  1  bay  leaf 

3  tablespoonfuls  flour  4  sprigs  parsley 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  2  egg  yolks 

}4  cupful  cream  1  blade  mace 

1  quart  white  stock  Salt  and  white  pepper  to  taste 

1  bunch  herbs  1  onion 

Take  heads  off  asparagus,  and  put  aside.  Cut  up  stalks  in  slices,  also 
onion,  put  these  into  saucepan  with  Crisco,  herbs,  parsley,  bay  leaf,  and 
mace,  and  fry  gently  for  fifteen  minutes,  add  flour,  then  stock,  and  simmer 
slowly  for  1^  hours.  Rub  through  sieve,  add  cream,  yolks  of  eggs,  and  sea- 
sonings, reheat,  but  take  care  not  to  boil  soup.  Just  before  serving  throw 
in  asparagus  tops,  which  should  be  first  cooked  in  a  little  boiling  stock. 

47 


Soups 

Cheese  Soup* 

4  tablespoonfuls  grated  2  cupfuls  cream 

cheese  2  eggs 

3  quarts  clear  soup  stock  Salt,  pepper,  and  paprika 
lyi  cupfuls  flour  to  taste 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Finely  grated  cheese 

Put  flour  into  double  boiler,  add  gradually  cream,  Crisco,  4  table- 
spoonfuls of  grated  cheese  and  paprika  to  taste,  stir  over  fire  till  a  smooth 
paste.  Break  in  eggs,  mix  well,  cook  two  minutes  longer  and  allow  to  cool. 
Roll  into  balls,  when  they  are  all  formed,  drop  into  boiling  water  and  cook 
gently  five  minutes.  Drain  and  put  into  soup  tureen.  Pour  over  boilinf; 
stock  and  serve  with  dish  of  finely  grated  cheese. 

Cream  of  Tomato  Soup 

2  tablespoonfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  celery  salt 
1}4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Salt,  pepper,  and  paprika  to 

1  cupful  milk  taste 

2yi  cupfuls  strained  tomato  Pinch  baking  soda 

juice  1  tablespoonful  tomato  catsup 

Blend  Crisco  and  flour  together  in  saucepan  over  fire,  add  milk  and 
bring  to  boiling  point.  Heat  tomato  juice,  tomato  catsup  and  add  soda 
and  seasonings.  Just  before  serving  add  Crisco  mixture  to  tomato  juice 
and  stir  till  boiling.  Serve  hot.  Another  method,  is  to  cook  1  quart  can 
of  tomatoes  with  1  quart  of  water  twenty  minutes,  then  rub  through 
sieve.  Blend  2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  with  2  tablespoonfuls  flour,  add  1 
tablespoonful  sugar,  salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper  to  taste,  and  1  table- 
spoonful  tomato  catsup.  Add  pinch  of  baking  soda  to  tomatoes,  then  add 
gradually  to  Crisco  mixture.  Just  bring  to  boiling  point  and  serve  with 
tablespoonful  whipped  cream  on  top  of  each  plate. 

Fish  Soup 

1  lb.  cod,  or  other  white  fish  3  parsley  sprigs 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  blade  mace 

1  quart  white  stock,  or  half  2  egg  yolks  — 

milk  and  half  water  ^  cupful  cream 

1  small  carrot  1  lemon 

1  small  onion  2  tablespoonfuls  flour 

1  stalk  celery  1  teaspoonful  chopped  parsley 

Dry  toast 

Wash  and  dry  fish  and  cut  into  small  pieces.  Put  into  saucepan  with 
stock,  vegetables  cut  in  small  pieces,  parsley  and  mace.  Let  these  simmer 
for  half  hour,  then  strain  off  liquid.  Melt  Crisco  in  pan,  stir  in  flour, 
then  add  fish  liquor  and  stir  till  it  boils.  Draw  it  to  the  side  of  fire  and  let 
cool  slightly.  Beat  yolks  of  eggs  with  cream,  and,  when  soup  has  cooled, 
strain  them  in.  Reheat  soup  without  boiling  it,  to  cook  eggs.  Season, 
and  add  few  drops  lemon  juice  and  chopped  parsley.  Serve  with  small 
pieces  of  dry  toast. 

48 


Soups 

Lentil  Soup 

1  cupful  lentils  2  stalks  celery 

2  cupfuls  milk  1  tablespoonful  flour 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  bay  leaf 

3  pints  stock  or  water  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

1  onion  }^  cupful  cream 

1  carrot  Croutons 

Wash  lentils;  soak  twenty-four  hours;  drain  well.  Cut  onion,  carrot 
and  celery  into  small  pieces,  then  put  them  into  a  saucepan  with  Crisco, 
cover,  and  cook  gently  for  fifteen  minutes.  Add  stock  and  simmer  2  hours, 
then  rub  through  sieve.  Return  to  pan,  add  milk,  seasonings,  and  bring 
to  boil.  Moisten  flour  with  yi  cupful  milk  or  stock,  add  it  to  soup  and 
simmer  five  minutes.  Season  to  taste  and  add  cream.  Serve  with  croutons 
of  fried  or  toasted  bread. 

Lentils  are  a  small  leguminous  seed,  not  so  generally  known  as  beans, 
but  an  excellent  nitrogenous  food,  containing  about  25  per  cent,  protein, 
more  than  50  per  cent,  starch,  with  over  2  per  cent.  fat.  They  are  not 
used  as  much  as  they  ought  to  be. 

Croutons  are  made  by  cutting  bread  into  tiny  cubes  and  browning 
through  and  through  in  hot  oven  or  putting  into  a  frying  pan  with  2  table- 
spoonfuls  Crisco  and  browning  well.  If  latter  is  used  great  care  must  be 
used  as  the  croutons  will  brown  easily. 

Lobster  Bisque 

1  can  lobster  H  cupful  Crisco 

1  cupful  breadcrumbs  Salt,  pepper,  red  pepper,  and 

1  quart  milk  grated  nutmeg  to  taste 

1  quart  water  Squares  fried  bread 

1  tablespoonful  flour  Thin  lemon  slices 

Open  a  can  of  lobster  of  good  quality,  take  out  best  pieces  and  cut 
into  small  squares  without  tearing;  put  them  aside.  Place  remains  of 
lobster  in  mortar  or  basin,  and  pound  quite  smooth  with  Crisco.  Soak 
bread  in  water,  adding  flour,  and  seasonings,  and  put  all  on  fire  in  soup 
pot  with  pounded  lobster  and  Crisco;  stir  till  it  boils,  and  boil  for  fifteen 
minutes;  then  pass  it  through  sieve,  add  milk  and  pieces  of  lobster,  and 
return  to  the  pot  till  it  boils  up.  Serve  with  small  squares  of  fried  bread, 
and  send  thin  slices  of  lemon  to  table  with  it.  This  is  an  excellent  soup, 
and  can  of  course  be  made  with  fresh  lobster. 

Norfolk  Puree 

}4  cupful  barley,  pearl  4  tablespoonfuls  cooked  carrot 

1  quart  water  balls 

3  pints  white  stock  4  tablespoonfuls  cooked  peas 

}4  cupful  cream  Salt,  pepper,  and  paprika  to 

1  yolk  of  egg  taste 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Diced  toast  or  fried  bread 

Put  barley  into  saucepan  of  cold  water,  bring  to  boil,  let  boil  five  min- 
utes, then  drain  off"  water;  this  removes  the  slightly  bitter  taste.  Now 
put  barley  into  saucepan  with  Crisco  and  water,  let  these  boil  gently  until 

49 


Soups 

barley  is  tender,  drain,  and  rub  through  sieve.  Add  stock  to  this  puree 
and  let  simmer  ten  minutes.  Beat  yolk  of  egg  with  cream  and  when  soup 
has  cooled  slightly,  strain  them  in.  Stir  soup  over  fire  a  few  minutes  to 
reheat;  but  be  careful  that  it  does  not  boil,  or  it  will  curdle.  Season  care- 
fully, add  carrot  balls  and  peas,  which  should  first  be  heated  in  a  little 
stock  or  water.  Serve  with  dice  of  toast  or  fried  bread.  If  you  do  not 
possess  a  round  vegetable  cutter,  cut  the  carrot  into  small  dice.  This  is  a 
particularly  nourishing  soup.  If  you  prefer  a  slightly  cheaper  variety, 
use  milk  instead  of  cream,  and  if  you  have  no  white  stock  use  milk  and 
water  in  equal  proportions  instead,  and  cook  a  carrot,  turnip  and  onion 
in  milk  and  water  for  twenty  or  thirty  minutes. 

Soup  Verte 

4  tablespoonfuls  flour  1  bunch  parsley 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  sugar 

2  quarts  stock  2  egg  yolks    . 

1  lb.  spinach  1  lemon 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Put  stock  into  saucepan;  add  spinach  and  parsley,  picked  and  thor- 
oughly washed;  let  all  boil  twenty  minutes;  strain,  rubbing  puree  through 
sieve.  Return  it  all  to  saucepan,  add  Crisco  and  flour  mixed  together 
with  cupful  of  water,  sugar  and  strained  juice  of  a  quarter  of  lemon.  Let 
boil  five  minutes.  Beat  yolks  of  eggs  with  }4  cupful  water,  add  them 
gradually  to  soup  off^  fire,  and  stir  near  fire  until  cooked.  Soup  must  not 
boil  after  yolks  are  added.    Season  with  salt  and  pepper  and  serve. 

Thick  Rice  Soup 

2  pints  water  or  stock  2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 
Salt  and  pepper  to  taste  1  cupful  rice 

2  small  onions  1  cupful  canned  tomatoes, 

or  4  fresh  ones 

Wash  and  drain  rice.  Heat  Crisco  in  saucepan,  add  rice  and  stir 
constantly  until  a  golden  brown.  Now  add  water  or  stock,  onions  and 
tomatoes  cut  in  small  pieces,  and  seasonings.    Cook  slowly  for  one  hour. 


50 


F 


ISH,  though  not  quite  so  nutritious  or 
so  stimulating  as  butcher's  meat,  is  an 
excellent  article  of  diet,  as  it  is  light  and 
easy  of  digestion  and  well  suited  to  deli- 
cate persons  and  those  following  sedentary  occupations,  who 
generally  do  not  take  exercise  in  the  fresh  air.  Fish  contains 
a  fair  proportion  of  flesh  forming  and  mineral  matter,  and  the 
white  kinds  very  little  fat,  hence  their  value  in  a  sick  diet.  A 
few  fishes  are  rich  in  fat,  as  salmon,  mackerel,  eels,  and  her- 
rings; they  are  more  satisfying  as  a  meal,  but  usually  more 
difl^cult  to  digest,  except  the  latter,  which  is  fairly  easy  to 
digest,  and,  being  inexpensive,  forms  an  economical  food. 

The  digestibility  will  vary  also  with  the  quality  of  the 
fish  and  the  methods  of  cooking.  White  fish  when  boiled  is 
improved  by  being  rubbed  over  with  a  cut  lemon,  or  by  adding 
a  little  vinegar  to  the  water  in  which  it  is  cooked  to  keep  it 
white  and  firm.  The  fish  should  be  put  into  hot,  not  boiling 
water,  otherwise  the  higher  temperature  contracts  the  skin 
too  quickly,  and  it  breaks  and  looks  unsightly.  Salt  fish  may 
be  placed  in  cold  water,  then  boiled  to  extract  some  of  the 
salt;  if  the  fish  has  been  salted  and  dried,  it  is  better  to  soak 
it  in  cold  water  for  about  twelve  hours  before  cooking. 

Fish  to  be  fried  should  be  cooked  in  sufficient  hot  Crisco 
to  well  cover  it,  after  having  been  dried  and  covered  with 
batter,  or  with  beaten  egg  and  breadcrumbs.  To  egg  and 
breadcrumb  fish  put  a  slice  into  seasoned  flour,  turning  it  so 
that  both  sides  may  be  covered.  Shake  off^  all  loose  flour. 
Brush  fish  over  with  beaten  egg.  Raise  fish  out  of  egg  with 
the  brush  and  a  knife,  drain  off^  egg  for  a  second,  and  lay  fish 
in  crumbs.  Toss  these  all  over  it,  lift  out  fish,  shake  off  all 
loose  crumbs,  lay  the  slice  on  a  board,  and  press  crumbs  down, 
so  that  surface  is  flat.  The  thicker  the  fish  the  more  slowly  it 
must  be  fried  after  the  first  two 

minutes,  or  it  will  be  raw  inside  -        -  -^rvsrJ 

when  the  outside  is  done. 


Fish 

To  bone  fish.  The  process  of  boning  is  known  as  filleting 
and  is  generally  done  by  the  fish  dealer,  but  when  this  is  not 
the  case  the  single  rule  for  boning  must  be  strictly  adhered  to 
in  order  to  keep  the  knife  on  the  bone — lifting  the  flesh  with 
the  left  hand  while  the  knife  slips  in  between  the  bone  and  the 
flesh.  Flat  fish  are  divided  down  the  middle  of  each  side  well 
into  the  bone,  and  the  boning  is  begun  at  either  side  of  the 
incision.  Round  fish  are  cut  down  the  back,  the  flesh  is  laid 
open  from  one  side  and  the  bone  is  removed  from  the  other. 
Occasionally  round  fish  are  boned  readily,  the  whole  fish 
minus  the  bones  being  returned  to  its  proper  shape,  as  in 
anchovies,  sardines,  herrings,  haddocks,  etc.,  in  this  case 
the  fish  would  be  split  down  the  front,  not  the  back,  and 
stitched  together  after  boning. 

Fish  stock  is  made  from  the  bones,  skin  and  trimmings 
of  white  fish.  These  are  broken  small  and  generally  flavored 
with  onion,  parsley,  herbs,  and  seasonings.  The  proportion 
of  water  used  is  rather  larger,  as  the  flavor  is  much  stronger 
and  also  more  easily  extracted  than  from  meat. 

Baked  Halibut 

2  lbs.  halibut  2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 

1  cupful  tomatoes  ^  teaspoonful  salt 

2  tablespoonfuls  flour  ^  teaspoonful  pepper 

Clean  fish,  season  with  salt  and  pepper,  dredge  with  flour,  place  in 
Criscoed  baking  pan,  pour  over  tomatoes,  and  dot  with  Crisco.  Bake  in  a 
moderate  oven,  basting  often. 

Baked  Salmon  with  Colbert  Sauce 

1  slice  salmon,  1>^  lbs.  in  weight  '  oauce 

4  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco        4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 

1  tablespoonful  chopped  2  tablespoonfuls  flour 

parsley  1  teaspoonful  lemon  juice 

1  tablespoonful  tarragon  3  anchovies 

vinegar  1  tablespoonful  chopped 

1  chopped  shallot,  gherkin  parsley 

and  anchovy  Pepper  to  taste 

Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper        2  cupfuls  fish  stock,  or  milk 
to  taste  and  water 

For  fish.  Mix  Crisco  with  shallot,  gherkin,  anchovy,  and  seasonings, 
lay  salmon  in  this  mixture  and  let  it  "marinade,"  as  it  is  called,  for  one 
hour.  At  the  end  of  that  time  lift  it  out;  do  not  shake  off  any  ingredients 
that  are  sticking  to  it.  Now  lay  it  in  a  well  Criscoed  fireproof  dish,  cover 
it  with  a  greased  paper,  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  for  thirty  minutes. 
For  sauce.  Melt  Crisco  in  small  saucepan,  stir  in  flour,  add  fish 
stock  and  stir  until  it  boils  and  thickens.  Rub  anchovies  through  fine 
sieve,  and  add  with  seasonings.    Serve  in  hot  tureen  with  fish. 

52 


Fish 


Baked  Shad 


1  shad  weighing  4  lbs.  1  cupful  breadcrumbs 
}4  lb.  mushrooms  1  egg 

}4  cupful  Crisco  Salt  and  white  pepper 

2  tablespoonfuls  chopped  Salt  pork 

parsley  1  cupful  cream 

2  tablespoonfuls  chopped  chives  1  teaspoonful  cornstarch 

Clean,  wipe  and  dry  the  shad.  Melt  Crisco,  add  breadcrumbs, 
chopped  mushrooms,  parsley,  chives,  egg  well  beaten,  salt  and  pepper. 
Stuff  fish  with  this  forcemeat,  then  lay  it  in  a  greased  pan,  put  thin  strips 
of  salt  pork  over  it  and  bake  in  hot  oven  for  forty  minutes.  Lay  the  fish 
on  a  hot  platter.  Pour  cream  into  baking  pan,  add  cornstarch  and  stir 
till  boiling.     Serve  with  the  fish. 

Cassolettes  of  Fish 

y^  lb.  cold  cooked  fish  or  4  tablespoonfuls  flour 

shrimps  Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper 

}4  cupful  milk  to  taste 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  lemon  juice 

y^  cupful  water  2  lbs.  cooked  potatoes 

2  tablespoonfuls  cream  2  eggs 

Rub  potatoes  through  a  sieve,  add  little  salt  and  pepper,  1  egg  well 
beaten,  and  2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  and  mix  well.  Roll  out  on 
floured  baking  board  to  1)4  inches  in  thickness.  Cut  into  small  rounds, 
brush  over  with  remaining  egg  well  beaten,  toss  in  fine  breadcrumbs, 
mark  the  center  slightly  with  a  smaller  round  cutter.  Fry  to  golden  color 
in  hot  Crisco.  Remove  lids,  carefully  remove  bulk  of  potatoes  from  in- 
side, fill  with  mixture,  replace  lids,  and  serve  hot.  For  mixture,  blend  2 
tablespoonfuls  of  the  Crisco  with  flour  in  a  saucepan  over  the  fire,  add  milk, 
water  and  seasonings  and  cook  for  a  few  minutes.  Put  in  flaked  fish  and 
make  hot.  Add  cream  last.  }4  teaspoonful  of  anchovy  extract  may  be 
added  if  liked. 

Sufficient  for  ten  cassolettes. 

Dressed  Crab 

1  good  sized  heavy  crab  2  tablespoonfuls  vinegar 

6  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  tablespoonful  chopped  parsley 

2  tablespoonfuls  breadcrumbs  Crisp  lettuce  leaves 

3  tablespoonfuls  olive  oil  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

If  possible  choose  a  crab  with  large  claws.  Boil  crab  in  boiling  salted 
water  for  thirty  minutes,  take  up  and  break  off  large  and  small  claws; 
Lay  crab  on  its  back,  pull  back  the  flap  under  its  body,  pull  it  right  out 
and  commence  to  remove  flesh  from  shell.  Take  care  that  the  little  bag 
near  head,  usually  full  of  sand,  is  taken  out.  Throw  away  all  bone  and 
finny  pieces.  The  flesh  is  of  two  kinds,  some  firm  and  white,  rest  soft  and 
dark.  Separate  former  into  little  shreds  with  a  fork,  also  the  white  meat 
from  claws,  which  must  be  cracked  in  order  to  obtain  it.  Mix  dark  soft 
substance  with  crumbs,  add  oil,  vinegar,  and  seasonings  to  taste.     Toss 

S3 


Fish 

shredded  white  meat  also  in  a  little  seasoning,  but  keep  the  two  kinds 
separate.  When  shell  is  empty  wash  and  dry  well.  Fill  shell  with  the 
two  mixtures,  arranging  them  alternately,  so  that  they  appear  in  dark 
and  white  stripes.  Have  it  heaped  a  little  higher  in  center.  Decorate 
meat  with  lines  of  finely  chopped  parsley,  and  force  the  Crisco  round  edge 
with  a  forcing  bag  and  tube.  Place  crab  on  some  crisp  lettuce  leaves. 
Arrange  some  of  the  small  claws  in  a  circle  round  shell. 


Curried  Cod 

2  lbs.  cod  1  tablespoonful  lemon  juice 

}4  cupful  Crisco  Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper 

2  cupfuls  white  stock  to  taste 

1  tablespoonful  flour  2  cupfuls  plain  boiled  rice 

2  teaspoonfuls  curry  powder  2  tablespoonfuls  chopped 
1  medium-sized  onion  cocoanut 


Wash  and  dry  the  cod,  and  cut  into  pieces  two  inches  square.  Melt 
Crisco  in  a  saucepan,  fry  cod  lightly  in  it,  then  take  out  and  set  aside. 
Add  sliced  onion,  flour,  and  curry  powder  to  the  Crisco  in  saucepan  and 
fry  ten  minutes,  stirring  continuously  to  prevent  onion  becoming  too 
brown,  then  stir  in  the  stock  and  cocoanut,  stir  until  it  boils,  and  after- 
wards simmer  for  twenty  minutes.  Strain  and  return  to  saucepan,  add 
lemon  juice  and  seasonings  to  taste,  bring  nearly  to  boil,  then  put  in  fish, 
cover  closely,  and  cook  slowly  for  half  hour.  An  occasional  stir  must  be 
given  to  prevent  the  fish  sticking  to  the  bottom  of  the  saucepan.  Turn 
out  on  hot  platter  and  serve  with  rice.  The  remains  of  cold  fish  may  be 
used,  in  which  case  the  preliminary  frying  may  be  omitted. 


Flounder  a  la  Creme 

.    1  flounder  about  2  lbs.  1  blade  mace 

2  cupfuls  milk  6  whole  white  peppers 
1  tablespoonful  cream  4  tablespoonfuls  flour 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Lemon  juice 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Skin  flounder,  and  take  fillets  off  neatly  by  sharply  rutting  down 
the  middle  of  back,  and  pressing  the  knife  close  to  the  bones.  This  will 
produce  4  long  fillets.  Cut  each  of  them  in  half  lengthways,  and  tie  up  in 
pretty  knot;  sprinkle  a  little  salt  over  and  put  them  aside.  V  ash  skin, 
bones  of  fish,  put  them  into  a  small  saucepan  with  milk,  mace,  and  whole 
peppers  and  simmer  for  half  hour;  strain  milk  into  clean  saucepan;  add 
fillets,  and  allow  to  simmer  for  ten  minutes.  Lift  them  out,  and  add  to 
milk  the  Crisco  and  flour  beaten  together;  stir  till  it  becomes  quite  smooth; 
add  salt,  pepper  and  lemon  juice  to  taste,  and  cream;  put  in  fillets  gently 
to  warm  through;  dish  neatly  and  pour  the  sauce  over  them.  Serve  very 
hot. 

54 


Fish 


Flounder  a  la  Turque 
For  Fish  For  Sauce 

1  large  flounder  }4  lemon 

1  teaspoonful  chopped  parsley        1  egg 

3  tablespoonfuls  breadcrumbs       }4  cupful  melted  Crisco 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  yolk  of  egg 

}4  teaspoonful  powdered  herbs       }4  teaspoonful  mustard 

1  pinch  powdered  mace  }4  teaspoonful  salt 
Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper        1  pinch  red  pepper 

to  taste  1  tablespoonful  vinegar 

}4  cupful  picked  shrimps  2  chopped  gherkins 

1  teaspoonful  chopped  parsley 

For  fish.  Wash  dry  and  trim  flounder.  On  one  side  make  cut  down 
center  from  near  head  to  near  tail  and  raise  flesh  from  the  bones.  Make  a 
stuffing  with  Crisco,  parsley,  breadcrumbs,  herbs,  shrimps,  lemon  juice, 
seasonings,  and  nearly  all  the  egg,  and  insert  under  the  fillets  of  the  flounder, 
leaving  the  center  open.  Dot  with  Crisco.  Brush  fish  over  with  remaining 
egg,  sprinkle  with  browned  breadcrumbs,  put  on  Criscoed  baking  tin, 
and  bake  thirty  minutes.     Serve  with  sauce. 

For  sauce.  Put  egg  yolk  into  a  bowl,  and,  with  a  wooden  spoon  stir  a 
little;  then  add  by  degrees  melted  Crisco,  stirring  constantly;  then  add 
seasonings,  vinegar,  gherkins  and  parsley. 

Fish  Pudding 

(KaU  B.  Vaughn) 

For  Pudding  For  Sauce 

2  lbs.  cooked  fish  3  tablespoonfuls  flour 

1  cupful  milk  3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 

1  tablespoonful  flour  1  slice  carrot 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  1  slice  onion 

2  eggs  1  slice  celery 
Salt  and  pepper  to  taste  1  blade  of  mace 

%  teaspoonful  onion  juice  1  bay  leaf 

1  tablespoonful  Worcester-  6  whole  peppers 

shire  sauce  1  sprig  of  parsley 

Cream  sauce  }i  teaspoonful  salt 

1  cupful  thick  cream 

For  pudding.  Boil  fish  in  boiling  salted  water  till  done.  Shred  or  break 
in  small  pieces,  and  free  from  skin  and  bone.  Blend  Crisco  and  flour  in  a 
saucepan  over  fire,  add  milk  and  stir  till  boiling,  remove  from  fire,  add  eggs 
well  beaten,  seasonings,  and  mix  well.  Turn  into  Criscoed  fireproof  dish, 
cover  with  greased  paper,  set  in  warm  water,  and  bake  in  moderate  oven 
for  thirty  minutes.  Serve  with  the  sauce,  potato  balls,  and  chopped 
parsley. 

For  sauce.  Blend  Crisco  and  flour  in  a  pan  over  fire,  add  vegetables, 
mace,  bay  leaf,  peppers,  parsley,  milk,  and  simmer  for  thirty  minutes. 
Strain,  return  to  pan,  add  salt,  allow  to  heat,  then  add  cream  and  it  is 
ready  to  serve. 

55 


Fish 


Fried  Fish 

Fish  Salt  and 

Crisco  Crumbs 

1  egg  Sauce 


pepper  to  taste 


Clean  fish,  season  with  salt  and  pepper.  Dip  in  crumbs,  brush  over 
with  beaten  egg,  and  crumb  again.  Fry  in  deep  Crisco  and  drain  on  brown 
paper. 

Sauce.  Blend  l}4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  with  1  tablespoonful  flour 
in  saucepan  over  fire,  add  1  cupful  of  milk  or  cream  and  bring  to  boil, 
cook  for  a  few  minutes  over  hot  water.  Cool  and  add  2  chopped  green 
bell  peppers  and  6  medium-sized  chopped  sour  pickles. 

Fried  Lobster  with  Horseradish  Sauce 

1  boiled  lobster  1  cupful  thick  cream 

Crisco  for  frying  Salt  and  paprika  to  taste 

1  egg  2  tablespoonfuls  grated 
Breadcrumbs  horseradish 

Cut  lobster  meat  into  neat  pieces,  dip  in  beaten  egg,  toss  in  bread- 
crumbs and  fry  in  hot  Crisco  to  brown  well.  Whip  up  cream,  season  it 
well  with  salt  and  paprika  and  stir  in  horseradish;  heap  this  sauce  in  the 
center  of  the  serving  dish  and  arrange  the  pieces  of  fried  lobster  round  it. 
Serve  hot. 

Gateau  of  Fish 

For  Fish 

1)4  lbs.  cooked  white  fish  1  teaspoonful  chopped  parsley 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  anchovy  paste 
^  cupful  breadcrumbs  or  extract 

}4  cupful  milk  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

2  eggs  Lemon  slices 

Dutch  or  oyster  sauce 

For  Sauce 

2  tablespoonfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  lemon  juice 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper 

1  cupful  milk  to  taste 

}4  cupful  oyster  liquor  2  hard-cooked  eggs 

1  dozen  small  oysters 

For  fish.  Cook  fish;  remove  skin  and  bone,  chop  it,  then  put  it  in  a 
basin,  add  breadcrumbs,  parsley,  seasonings,  milk,  eggs  well  beaten,  and 
melted  Crisco.  Mix  well,  turn  into  a  Criscoed  mold,  cover  with  greased 
paper  and  steam  one  hour.  Serve  with  sauce  poured  over,  and  dish  gar* 
nished  with  lemon  slices. 

For  sauce.  Blend  Crisco  and  flour  in  pan  over  fire,  stir  in  milk,  oyster 
liquor,  stir  till  it  boils  for  eight  minutes,  then  add  seasonings.  Boil  one 
minute,  add  eggs  chopped,  and  oysters.    Mix  and  serve. 

56 


Fish 


Oyster  Shortcake 


2  cupfuls  flour  1  quart  oysters 

2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder       }^  cupful  Crisco 
yi  teaspoonful  salt  2  tablespoonfuls  cornstarch 

^  cupful  milk  }4  cupful  cream 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Mix  flour,  baking  powder  and  ^  teaspoonful  salt,  then  sift  twice, 
work  in  Crisco  with  tips  of  fingers,  add  milk  gradually.  The  dough  should 
be  just  soft  enough  to  handle.  Toss  on  floured  baking  board,  divide  into 
two  parts,  pat  lightly  and  roll  out.  Place  in  two  shallow  Criscoed  cake 
tins  and  bake  in  quick  oven  fifteen  minutes.  Spread  them  with  butter. 
Moisten  cornstarch  with  cream,  put  into  pan  with  oysters  and  seasonings 
and  make  very  hot.  Allow  to  cook  a  few  minutes  then  pour  half  over  one 
crust,  place  other  crust  on  top  and  pour  over  rest  of  oysters.  Serve  at 
once. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  shortcake. 

Salmon  Mold 

1  can  salmon  3  eggs 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  tablespoonful  Worcestershire 
}4  cupful  roiled  crackers  sauce 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Sauce 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  1  cupful  milk 

1  tablespoonful  flour  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

1  egg  Parsley 

For  the  mold.  Remove  oil,  skin  and  bone  from  the  salmon.  Rub 
salmon  smooth,  add  eggs  well  beaten,  crackers,  and  seasonings.  Turn  into 
a  Criscoed  mold,  and  steam  for  one  hour.    Turn  out  and  serve  with  sauce. 

For  sauce.  Blend  Crisco  and  flour  in  a  saucepan  over  fire,  add  milk, 
and  stir  and  boil  for  five  minutes.  Add  egg  well  beaten,  and  seasonings, 
pour  at  once  over  salmon.     Garnish  with  parsley. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  loaf. 


57 


A.T-S  J 


lOOKERY  is  a  branch  of  applied 
chemistry.  To  cook  anything,  in 
the  narrower  sense  of  the  term, 
means  to  bring  about  changes  in 
it  by  submitting  it  to  the  action  of  heat,  and  usually  of 
moisture  also,  which  will  make  it  more  fitted  for  food ;  and  it  is  on 
the  nature  of  this  action  on  different  materials  that  the  rational 
of  the  cook's  art  chiefly  depends.  Good  cooking  can  make  any 
meat  tender,  and  bad  cooking  can  make  any  meat  tough. 

The  substance  in  meat  called  albumen  becomes  tougher 
and  more  indigestible,  the  higher  the  temperature  to  which 
it  is  subjected  reaches  beyond  a  certain  point.  It  is  this 
effect  of  heat  on  albumen,  therefore,  which  has  to  be  con- 
sidered whenever  the  cooking  of  meat  is  in  question,  and 
which  mainly  determines  the  right  and  the  wrong,  whether 
in  the  making  of  a  soup  or  a  custard,  the  roasting  or  boiling 
of  a  chicken  or  a  joint,  or  the  frying  of  a  cutlet  or  an  omelet. 

We  now  will  see  to  begin  with,  what  are  the  special  ways 
in  which  it  bears  on  meat  cookery.  Take  a  little  bit  of  raw 
meat  and  put  it  in  cold  water.  The  juice  gradually  soaks 
out  of  it,  coloring  the  water  pink  and  leaving  the  meat  nearly 
white.  Now  take  another  bit,  and  pour  boiling  water  upon 
it;  and  though  no  juice  can  be  seen  escaping,  the  whole  sur- 
face of  the  meat  turns  a  whitish  color  directly. 

Lean  meat  is  made  up  of  bundles  of  hollow  fibres  within 
which  the  albuminous  juices  are  stored.  Wherever  these 
fibres  are  cut  through,  the  juice  oozes  out  and  spreads  itself 
over  the  surface  of  the  meat.  If,  as  in  our  first  little  experi- 
ment, the  meat  is  put  in  cold  water,  or  even  in  warm  water, 
or  exposed  to  a  heat  insufficient  to  set  the  albumen,  either 
in  an  oven  or  before  the  fire,  the  albuminous  juices  are  in  the 
first  case  drawn  out  and  dissolved,  and  in  the  second  evapo- 
rated.   In  either  case  the  meat  is  deprived  of  them.    But  if  the 


Meats 

meat  is  put  into  boiling  water  or  into  a  quick  oven  or  before 
a  hot  fire,  the  surface  albumen  is  quickly  set,  forms  a  tough 
white  coating  which  effectually  plugs  the  ends  of  the  cut 
fibres,  and  prevents  any  further  escape  of  their  contents. 

Here,  then,  we  have  the  first  principles  on  which  meat 
cookery  must  be  conducted;  viz:  that  if  we  wish  to  get  the 
juices  out  of  the  meat,  as  for  soups  and  stews,  the  liquid  in 
which  we  put  it  must  be  cold  to  begin  with;  while  if  we  wish, 
as  for  boiled  or  roast  meat,  to  keep  them  in,  the  meat  must  be 
subjected  first  of  all  to  the  action  of  boiling  water,  a  hot  fire 
or  a  quick  oven.  The  meats  of  soups  and  stews  must  not  be 
raw,  and  that  of  joints  must  not  be  tough;  and  the  cooking 
of  both  one  and  the  other,  however  it  is  begun,  should  be 
completed  at  just  such  a  moderate  temperature  as  will  set, 
but  not  harden,  the  albumen.  That  is  to  say,  the  soup  or 
stew  must  be  raised  to  this  temperature,  after  the  meat  juices 
have  been  drawn  out  by  a  lower  one,  while  a  joint  or  fowl 
must  be  lowered  to  it  after  the  surface  albumen  has  been 
hardened  by  a  higher  one. 

All  poultry  or  game  for  roasting  should  be  dredged  with 
flour  before  and  after  trussing,  to  dry  it  perfectly,  as  other- 
wise it  does  not  crisp  and  brown  so  well.  Unless  poultry  is  to 
be  boiled  or  stewed  it  never  should  be  washed  or  wet  in  any 
way  as  this  renders  the  flesh  sodden  and  the  skin  soft.  Good 
wiping  with  clean  cloths  should  be  quite  sufficient.  With  the 
exception  of  ducks  and  geese,  all  poultry  and  game  require 
rather  a  large  addition  of  fat  during  roasting,  as  the  flesh  is 
dry.  Chickens  will  cook  in  from  twenty  to  thirty  minutes; 
fowls  take  from  thirty  to  sixty  minutes  when  young  and 
tender,  the  only  condition  in  which  they  are  fit  to  roast; 
turkeys  take  from  one  to  two  hours  and  even  more  if  excep- 
tionally large.  Game  takes  longer  in  proportion  to  its  size 
than  poultry,  and  all  birds  require  better  and  more  cooking 
than  beef  or  mutton. 

Beef  Collops 

1  lb.  Hamburg  steak  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

1  chopped  onion  1  teaspoonful  mushroom  catsup 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  or  Worcestershire  sauce 

1  cupful  water  or  stock  Sippets  of  toast  or  croutons 

1  tablespoonful  flour  Mashed  potatoes  or  plain  boiled  rice 

Melt  Crisco  in  saucepan,  put  in  beef  and  onion  and  fry  light  brown, 
then  sprinkle  in  flour,  add  water  or  stock,  catsup  or  sauce,  and  seasonings. 

59 


Meats 

Cover  pan  and  let  contents  simmer  very  gently  forty-five  minutes.  Arrange 
collops  on  hot  platter  with  border  of  sippets  of  toast  or  croutons,  or  border 
of  hot  mashed  potatoes,  or  plain  boiled  rice. 

Braised  Loin  of  Mutton 

3  lbs.  loin  mutton  1  turnip 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  carrot 

1  celery  stalk  3  cloves 
}4  teaspoonful  whole  white  peppers         2  sprigs  parsley 

1  bunch  sweet  herbs  4  tablespoonfuls  flour 

Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper  12  button  mushrooms 

to  taste  1  onion 

Remove  bone  from  mutton,  rub  with  a  little  salt,  pepper  and  red 
pepper  mixed  together;  roll  up  and  tie  in  neat  roll  with  tape;  cut  up 
celery,  onion,  carrot  and  turnip,  and  lay  them  at  bottom  of  saucepan  with 
herbs  and  parsley;  lay  mutton  on  top  of  these,  and  pour  enough  boiling 
water  to  three  parts  cover  it,  and  simmer  slowly  two  hours;  lift  mutton 
into  roasting  tin  with  a  few  tablespoonfuls  of  the  gravy;  set  in  hot  oven 
until  brown;  strain  gravy  and  skim  oflF  fat,  melt  Crisco  in  saucepan,  add 
flour,  then  add  gravy  gradually,  seasoning  of  salt  and  pepper,  mushrooms, 
and  boil  eight  minutes.  Set  mutton  on  hot  platter  with  mushrooms 
round,  and  gravy  strained  over. 

Chicken  a  la  Tartare 

1  young  chicken  Breadcrumbs 

1  egg  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

yi  cupful  Crisco  Mixed  pickles 

Tartare  sauce 

Singe,  empty,  and  split  chicken  in  half;  take  breastbone  out  and 
sprinkle  salt  and  pepper  over.  Melt  yi  cupful  Crisco  in  frying  pan  and 
fry  chicken  half  hour,-  turning  it  now  and  then.  Remove  from  pan  and 
place  between  two  dishes  with  heavy  weight  on  top,  till  it  is  nearly  cold. 
Then  dip  in  egg  beaten  up,  and  roll  in  breadcrumbs.  Melt  remaining 
Crisco,  then  sprinkle  it  all  over  chicken;  roll  in  breadcrumbs  once  more. 
Fry  in  hot  Crisco  to  golden  color.  Serve  at  once  with  a  garnish  of  chopped 
pickles,  and  tartare  sauce.  . 

Chicken  en  Casserole 

1  tender  chicken  for  roasting  1  cupful  hot  sweet  cream 

yi  cupful  Crisco  2  cupfuls  chopped  mushrooms 

Salt  and  pepper  1  tablespoonful  chopped 
1  pint  hot  water  parsley 

Clean  chicken,  split  down  back,  and  lay  breast  upward,  in  casserole. 
Spread  Crisco  over  breast,  dust  with  salt  and  pepper,  add  hot  water, 
cover  closely  and  cook  in  hot  oven  one  hour.  When  nearly  tender,  put  in 
the  cream,  mushrooms,  and  parsley;  cover  again  and  cook  twenty  minutes 

60 


Meats 

longer.    Serve  hot  in  the  casserole.    Oysters  are  sometimes  substituted  for 
mushrooms,  and  will  be  found  to  impart  a  pleasing  flavor. 

Curried  Ox-Tongue 

6  slices  cooked  ox-tongue  1  cupful  brown  sauce 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  dinner  roll 

2  teaspoonfuls  curry  powder  1  egg 

6  chopped  mushrooms  1  cupful  boiled  rice 

For  tongue.  Cut  slices  of  tongue,  fry  in  Crisco,  Reason  with  ^  tea- 
spoonful  salt  and  curry  powder,  then  add  mushrooms,  and  brown  sauce, 
simmer  ten  minutes.  Cut  large  dinner  roll  into  slices,  and  toast  them 
lightly  on  both  sides;  dip  them  in  egg  well  beaten,  then  fry  in  hot  Crisco 
and  drain.  Dish  up  slices  of  tongue  alternately  with  fried  slices  of  roll, 
pour  sauce  round  base,  and  serve  with  boiled  rice. 

FoT  brown  sauce.  Melt  3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco,  add  1  chopped  onion, 
piece  of  carrot,  2  mushrooms,  and  fry  a  good  brown  color;  stir  in  2  table- 
spoonfuls flour  and  fry  it  also;  then  add  1  cupful  stock  or  water  and  few 
drops  of  kitchen  bouquet.  Let  all  cook  ten  minutes,  stirring  constantly 
add  seasoning  of  salt  and  pepper,  and  strain  for  use. 

Suflicient  for  6  slices. 

Fried  Chicken 

Chicken  Crisco 

Select  young  tender  chickens  and  disjoint.  Wash  carefully  and  let 
stand  over  night  in  refrigerator. 

A 

(Katt  B.  Vauthn) 

Drain  chicken  but  do  not  wipe  dry.  Season  with  salt  and  white  pepper 
and  dredge  well  with  flour.  Fry  in  deep  Crisco  hot  enough  to  brown  a 
crumb  of  bread  in  sixty  seconds.  It  requires  from  ten  to  twelve  minutes 
to  fry  chicken.  Drain  and  place  on  a  hot  platter  garnished  with  parsley 
and  rice  croquettes. 

B 

{KaU  B.  Vauthn) 

Make  batter  of  1  cupful  flour,  1  teaspoonful  salt,  2  grains  white  pepper, 
}4  cupful  water,  2  well  beaten  eggs,  and  1  tablespoonful  melted  Crisco. 
Have  kettle  of  Crisco  hot  enough  to  turn  crumb  of  bread  a  golden  brown 
in  sixty  seconds.  Drain  chicken  but  do  not  dry.  Dip  each  joint  separately 
in  batter  and  fry  in  the  Crisco  until  golden  brown.  It  should  take  from 
ten  to  twelve  minutes.    Serve  on  a  folded  napkin  garnished  with  parsley. 

C 

(KaU  B.  Vauthn) 

Drain  chicken  but  do  not  wipe  dry.  Season  with  salt  and  white 
pepper  and  dredge  well  with  flour.  Put  three  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  in 
frying  pan  and  when  hot  place  chicken  in  pan;  cover,  and  allow  to  steam 
for  ten  minutes.  Uncover,  and  allow  chicken  to  brown,  taking  care  to 
turn  frequently.  Serve  on  hot  platter,  garnished  with  parsley  and  serve 
with  cream  gravy. 

61 


Meats 


Select  medium-sized  chickens  and  wash  well,  then  cut  into  near  pieces 
and  season  them.  Mix  1  cupful  cornmeal  with  I  cupful  flour,  1  tablespoon- 
ful  salt  and  1  tablespoonful  black  pepper.  Dip  each  piece  in  mixture  and 
fry  in  hot  Crisco  twelve  minutes.  Drain  and  serve  with  cornmeal  batter 
bread. 

E 

Wash  young  chicken,  cut  into  neat  pieces,  dust  with  salt,  pepper, 
and  flour,  and  fry  -in  hot  Crisco  twelve  minutes.     Drain,   place  on   hot 

E latter,  pour  over  it  yi  pint  hot  sweet   cream,  sprinkle  over  with  chopped 
ot  roasted  peanuts,  little  salt  and  pepper. 

Fried  Chicken,  Mexican  Style 

1  tender  chicken  1  seeded  green  pepper 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste  2  large  tomatoes 

1  clove  garlic  5  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 

Corn  croquettes 

For  Croquettes 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  }4  teaspoonful  sugar 

1  can  or  14  ears  corn  Pepper  and  salt  to  taste 

2  tablespoonfuls  flour  1  egg 

2  cupfuls  milk  Breadcrumbs 

For  chicken.  Draw,  wash  and  dry  chicken,  then  cut  into  neat  Joints, 
sprinkle  with  salt  and  pepper.  Heat  Crisco  in  frying  pan,  add  clove  of 
garlic  and  pepper  cut  in  small  pieces.  When  garlic  turns  brown  take  out, 
put  chicken  in,  fry  till  brown,  then  cover  closely,  allow  to  simmer  till  ready. 
A  short  time  before  covering  chicken,  add  tomatoes  peeled  and  cut  in  small 
pieces. 

For  croquettes.  Drain  liquor  from  can  of  corn,  or  grate  ears,  and  chop 
kernels  fine.  Blend  Crisco  and  flour  together  in  pan  over  fire,  add  milk, 
stir  till  boiling  and  cook  five  minutes,  stirring  all  the  time,  add  season- 
ings, and  corn,  and  cook  five  minutes,  then  allow  to  cool.  When  cold, 
form  lightly  with  floured  hands  into  neat  croquettes,  brush  over  with 
beaten  egg,  toss  in  crumbs  and  fry  in  hot  Crisco  to  a  golden  brown.  Drain. 
Place  chicken  on  hot  platter,  garnish  with  croquettes  and  serve  hot. 

Fried  Sweetbreads 

Sweetbreads  Crisco 

Egg  Peas  or  new  Potatoes 

Breadcrumbs  Rich  brown  gravy 

Sweetbreads  should  always  be  blanched  before  using.  To  blanch, 
soak  in  cold  water  two  hours,  changing  water  3  or  4  times.  Put  into  sauce- 
pan, cover  with  cold  water,  add  little  salt,  and  skim  well  as  water  comes 
to  boil.  Simmer  from  ten  to  thirty  minutes,  according  to  kind  of  sweet- 
bread used.     Remove  to  basin  of  cold  water  until  cold,  or  wash  well  in 

62 


Meats 

cold  water  and  press  between  two  plates  till  cold.  Dry,  remove  skin, 
cut  in  slices,  coat  with  beaten  egg  and  toss  in  breadcrumbs,  and  fry  in 
hot  Crisco  to  a  golden  brown.  Serve  round  peas  or  new  potatoes,  with 
rich  brown  gravy. 

For  those  whose  digestions  are  at  fault,  sweetbreads  ought  to  be  eaten 
as  a  daily  ration  if  the  pocketbook  will  afford  it.  For  this  special  part  of 
the  animal's  anatomy  is  that  one  of  all  the  viscera  whose  mission  is  to  help 
digestion.  It  is  of  the  very  pancreas  itself,  that  stomach  gland  of  mar- 
velously  involved  structure  which  elaborates  the  powerful  pancreatic 
juice.  It  is  alkaline  in  nature,  able  to  digest  starches,  fats,  and  most  of 
what  escapes  digestion  in  the  stomach  proper.  It  received  its  name  from  a 
fancied  resemblance  in  its  substance  and  formation  to  the  rising  lumps 
of  dough  destined  for  bread. 

Kidney  Omelet 

4  kidneys  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

■  6  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  tablespoonful  chopped  parsley 

6  eggs  2  tablespoonfuls  cream 

Melt  2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  in  frying  pan.  Skin  kidneys  and  cut  into 
small  dice  and  toss  them  into  hot  Crisco  three  minutes.  Whisk  whites 
of  eggs  to  stiff  froth,  then  add  yolks,  seasonings,  parsley,  and  cream,  then 
add  kidney.  Make  remaining  Crisco  hot  in  omelet  pan  or  frying  pan, 
pour  in  omelet  and  fry  over  clear  fire  six  minutes.  When  the  edges  are 
set,  fold  edges  over  so  that  omelet  assumes  an  oval  shape;  be  careful  that 
it  is  not  done  too  much;  to  brown  the  top,  hold  pan  before  fire,  or  put  it  in 
oven;  never  turn  an  omelet  in  the  pan.  Slip  it  carefully  on  a  hot  dish 
and  serve  the  instant  it  comes  from  the  fire. 


Macaroni  and  Round  Steak 

}4  package  macaroni  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

^  can  tomatoes  }4  cupful  grated  cheese 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  lb.  round  steak 

2  onions  }4  cupful  breadcrumbs 

Break  macaroni  into  inch  lengths  and  add  it  with  1  tablespoonful  of 
the  Crisco  to  plenty  of  boiling  water  and  boil  twenty  minutes,  then  drain. 
Put  steak  and  onions  through  a  food  chopper.  Put  macaroni  into  Criscoed 
fireproof  dish,  then  put  in  meat  and  onions,  add  seasonings,  tomatoes, 
cheese,  breadcrumbs,  and  remainder  of  Crisco  melted.  Bake  in  moderate 
oven  one  hour. 

Meat  Cakes 

1  lb.  round  steak  yi  lb.  grated  cheese 

3  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         2  cupfuls  breadcrumbs 

3  small  onions  Salt,  pepper,  and  paprika 

1  tablespoonful  chopped  parsley  to  taste 

2  eggs  Tomato  sauce 

63 


Meats 


For  Sauce 


4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  can  or  >^  lb.  fresh  tomatoes 

1  carrot  1  tablespoonful  tomato  catsup 

1  turnip  1  bunch  sweet  herbs 

2  onions  Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper 

3  tablespoonfuls  flour  to  taste 
2  cupfuls  stock  1  blade  mace 

1  bay  leaf 

For  meat  cakes.  Grind  steak  and  onions  together,  add  Crisco,  cheese, 
parsley,  crumbs,  seasonings,  and  eggs  lightly  beaten.  Mix  toget-her; 
form  into  small  cakes,  toss  in  flour  and  fry  in  hot  Crisco.  Serve  hot  with 
tomato  sauce. 

for  sauce.  Slice  vegetables,  fry  in  Crisco  ten  minutes;  then  add  flour, 
stock,  mace,  bay  leaf,  tomatoes,  catsup,  and  herbs.  Stir  till  they  boil, 
then  simmer  gently  forty-five  minutes.  Rub  through  sieve,  add  seasonings 
and  use. 

Sufficient  for  twelve  meat  cakes. 

Roast  Turkey 
For  Stuffing 

1  quart  fine  breadcrumbs  }4  teaspoonful  powdered  thyme 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  ^  teaspoonful  white  pepper 
1}4  teaspoonfuls  salt  1  egg 

2  tablespoonfuls  chopped  onion       1  cupful  country  sausage 
1  lemon  A  little  warm  water 

1  tablespoonful  chopped  parsley      1  turkey 

Salt  pork 

Mix  sausage  with  breadcrumbs,  add  egg  well  beaten,  Crisco,  season- 
ings, grated  rind  and  strained  juice  of  lemon,  and  moisten  with  a  little 
hot  water.  Be  careful  not  to  make  stuffing  too  moist.  See  that  turkey  is 
well  plucked,  singed  and  wiped;  fold  over  pinions,  and  pass  skewer  through 
them,  thick  part  of  legs  and  body,  catching  leg  and  pinning  it  on  other  side; 
now  secure  bottom  part  of  leg,  which  should  have  feet  cut  off  half  way  to 
first  joint,  fill  breast  of  bird  with  stuffing  and  skewer  down  skin.  Place  2 
strips  salt  pork  in  bottom  of  roasting  pan,  lay  in  turkey  and  place  several 
strips  salt  pork  over  breast  and  sprinkle  lightly  with  flour.  Roast  in  hot 
oven,  allowing  fifteen  minutes  to  the  pound.  Baste  occasionally  with 
melted  Crisco.  Serve  hot  decorated  with  cooked  onions,  celery  tips, 
cranberries,  and  parsley. 

Roast  with  Spaghetti 

2  tablespoonfuls  flour  yi  cupful  water 

3  lbs.  sirloin  steak  ^  can  tomatoes 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  cupful  cooked  peas 

1  large  onion  1  cupful  cooked  spaghetti 

}4  lb.  bacon  1  cupful  cooked  mushrooms 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste  8  stuffed  olives 

Melt  Crisco  and  make  very  hot  in  roasting  pan,  lay  in  steak,  season 
with  salt  and  pepper,  cover  with  layer  of  sliced  onion,  layer  of  bacon,  add 

64 


Meats 

water,  cover,  and  cook  in  moderate  oven  about  three  hours.  Have  ready 
peas,  mushrooms,  and  spaghetti.  Place  meat  on  hot  platter.  Add  juice 
of  tomatoes  to  gravy,  and  flour  moistened  with  a  little  cold  water,  peas  and 
mushrooms,  and  when  hot  pour  round  meat.  Spread  spaghetti  on  top 
and  decorate  with  olives. 

Sirloin  Steak  with  Fried  Apples 

1  sirloin  steak  weighing  2  jbs.  }4  teaspoonful  white  pepper 

3  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  4  tart  apples 

1  teaspoonful  salt  Milk 
Flour 

Mix  salt  and  pepper  with  melted  Crisco,  then  rub  mixture  into  steak 
and  let  steak  lie  in  it  twenty  minutes.  Broil  it  over  a  clear  fire  till  done 
and  serve  surrounded  with  fried  apples.  Feel  and  core  and  slice  apples, 
then  dip  in  milk,  toss  in  flour,  and  drop  into  hot  Crisco  to  brown. 


65 


N  the  vegetable  kingdom  the  cereals 
form  a  very  important  part  of  our  diet, 
by  supplying  cniefly  the  carbohydrates 
or  heat  giving  matter.  Another  nutritious 
group  termed  pulse,  are  those  which  have 
their  seed  enclosed  in  a  pod.  The  most  familiar  are  peas, 
beans,  and  lentils;  peas  and  beans  are  eaten  in  the  green  or 
unripe  state  as  well  as  in  the  dried.  Vegetables  included  in 
the  pulse  group  are  very  nourishing  if  they  can  be  digested, 
they  contain  a  large  amount  of  flesh  forming  matter,  usually 
a  fair  amount  of  starch,  but  are  deficient  in  fat.  Peas  and 
beans  also  contain  sulphur  and  tend  to  produce  flatulence  when 
indulged  in  by  those  of  weak  digestion.  Lentils  contain  less 
sulphur,  and  do  not  produce  this  complaint  so  readily. 

The  more  succulent  vegetables  include  tubers,  as  potatoes 
and  Jerusalem  artichokes,  leaves,  stems,  and  bulbs,  as  cab- 
bages, spinach,  celery,  and  onions,  roots  and  flowers,  as  car- 
rots, parsnips,  and  cauliflower.  These  are  very  valuable  on 
account  of  the  mineral  matter,  chief  of  which  are  the  potash 
salts,  so  necessary  to  keep  the  blood  in  a  healthy  condition. 

Care  should  be  taken  in  cooking  vegetables  not  to  lose  the 
salts.  Steaming  is  preferable  to  boiling,  by  preserving  the 
juices,  though  it  does  not  tend  to  improve  the  color  of  green 
vegetables.  A  little  lemon  juice  added  to  the  water  in  which 
new  potatoes  are  boiling  improves  their  color.  Mint  is  some- 
times cooked  with  new  potatoes.  To  secure  a  good  color  in 
vegetables  when  cooked,  careful  cleaning  and  preparation 
before  cooking  is  essential.  Earthy  roots,  such  as  potatoes, 
turnips,  and  carrots,  must  be  both  well  scrubbed  and  thor- 
oughly rinsed  in  clean  water  before  peeling.  From  all  vege- 
tables, coarse  or  discolored  leaves  and  any  dark  or  decayed 
spots  should  be  carefully  removed  before  cooking. 

Potatoes  should  be  peeled  thinly,  or,  if  new,  merely 
brushed  or  rubbed  with  a  coarse  cloth  to  get  the  skin  off. 


FegetabUf 

Turnips  should  be  thickly  peeled,  as  the  rind  in  these  is  hard 
and  woody.  Carrots  and  salsify,  unless  very  old,  need  scraping 
only.  After  the  removal  of  the  skin,  all  root  vegetables 
(except  those  of  the  onion  kind)  should  be  put  in  cold  water 
till  wanted.  Potatoes,  artichokes,  and  salsify  especially, 
must  not  remain  a  moment  out  of  water  after  peeling,  or 
they  will  turn  a  dark  color,  and  to  the  water  used  for  the 
two  last,  a  little  salt  and  lemon  juice  should  be  added  in  order 
to  keep  them  white. 

Root  vegetables  should  be  boiled  with  the  lid  of  the  pan 
on,  green  vegetables  should  be  boiled  with  the  lid  of  the 
pan  off,  for  the  preservation  of  the  color. 

Baked  Parsnips 

}4  cupful  Crisco  S  parsnips 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 
Peel  and  wash  parsnips  and  cut  into  two  lengthwise,  and  steam  for 
one  hour.     Remove  from  fire,  lay  in  greased  baking  pan,  sprinkle  with 
salt  and  pepper,  spread  Crisco  over  top  and  bake  slowly  till  tender.    Serve 
hot. 

Brussels  Sprouts  with  Crisco 

^  cupful  Crisco  2  baskets  brussels  sprouts 

yi  cupful  grated  cheese 

Trim  sprouts  and  cook  them  in  boiling  salted  water  till  tender,  drain 
and  dry  on  clean  cloth.  Heat  Crisco  hot,  then  add  sprouts,  and  fry  until 
very  hot.  Turn  them  into  hot  vegetable  dish,  sprinkle  cheese  over  them 
and    serve   immediately. 

Sufl&cient  for  one  dish. 

Colcannon 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  ^  lb.  cold  cooked  cabbage 

yi  lb.  cold  cooked  potatoes  1  onion 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Chop  onion  and  cabbage  and  mash  potatoes.  Put  into  frying  pan 
with  Crisco  and  fry  few  minutes  adding  seasonings.  Turn  into  Criscoed 
fireproof  dish  and  brown  in  oven. 

Lentils  and  Rice 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  curry  powder 

y2  cupful  lentils  1  small  onion 

}4  cupful  milk  1  tablespoonful  lemon  juice 

^3  cupful  water  1  cupful  boiled  rice 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Wash  lentils  and  soak  them  in  milk  twelve  hours.  Melt  Crisco, 
slice  onion  and  fry  a  pale  brown,  add  curry  powder,  milk,  water,  season- 
ings, and  lentils,  simmer  two  hours  and  add  lemon  juice  just  before  serving. 
Serve  with  rice. 

67 


Vegetables 

Corn  Fritters 

1  tablespoonful  melted  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

1  can  crushed  corn  2  teaspoonfuls  salt 

1  cupful  flour  %  teaspoonful  white  pepper 

3  tablespoonfuls  milk 

Put  corn  into  bowl,  add  Crisco,  salt,  pepper,  flour,  baking  powder, 
and  milk.  Mix  well  and  drop  in  spoonfuls  on  a  Criscoed  griddle.  Fire 
brown  on  both  sides.  These  fritters  are  a  palatable  accompaniment  to 
roast  chicken. 

Sufficient  for  twelve  fritters. 

Corn,  Okra  and  Tomatoes 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  6  ears  corn 

2  tablespoonfuls  sugar  6  okra  pods 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste  6  tomatoes 

2  cupfuls  water 

Cut  corn  from  cob,  put  into  saucepan,  cover  with  water  and  bring  to 
boil.  Scald  and  skin  tomatoes  and  cut  okra  into  cross  sections  half  inch 
long.  Add  both  to  corn  with  Crisco  and  seasonings.  Stir  and  cook  until 
tender.     Serve  hot. 

Curried  Cauliflower 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  dessertspoonful  curry  powder 

1  cauliflower  1  tablespoonful  lemon  juice 

1  sliced  onion  }^  teaspoonful  salt 

1  cupful  stock  or  water 

Boil  cauliflower  in  boiling  salted  water  till  tenaer,  drain,  then  divide 
into  small  flowerets.  Fry  onion  in  Crisco  a  few  minutes,  then  add  curry 
powder,  lemon  juice  and  stock  or  water.  Simmer  fifteen  minutes,  then 
strain  into  clean  saucepan.  Add  cauliflower  and  salt  and  simmer  fifteen 
minutes.     Serve  hot. 

Creamed  Potatoes  au  Gratin 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  tablespoonful  flour 

1  quart  peeled  and  diced  1  cupful  grated  cheese 

potatoes  1  teaspoonful  salt 

2  cupfuls  milk  }4  teaspoonful  white  pepper 

Few  breadcrumbs 

Cut  potatoes  in  about  1^-inch  pieces,  then  boil  carefully  in  boiling 
salted  water.  When  done,  drain,  and  pour  into  Criscoed  fireproof  dish. 
Blend  Crisco  and  flour  in  saucepan  over  fire,  add  milk,  stir  till  boiling,  then 
add  cheese  and  seasonings.  Pour  over  potatoes;  grate  a  little  cheese  over 
top,  sprinkle  with  breadcrumbs  and  bake  five  minutes  in  hot  oven. 

68 


Vegetables 

Eggplant  en  Casserole 

4  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         2  garlic  cloves 
1  large  eggplant  3  tomatoes 

3  small  onions  1  green  pepper 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Slice  eggplant  into  thin  slices,  then  slice  onions,  garlic,  tomatoes 
and  pepper  quite  thin.  Arrange  them,  alternately,  in  a  Criscoed  casserole, 
seasoning  each  layer  with  salt  and  pepper.  Pour  in  melted  Crisco  and 
cover.  Cook  over  slow  fire  or  in  moderate  oven  till  the  eggplant  is  tender. 
Serve  hot  or  cold. 

Fried  Parsley 

Crisco  1  bunch  parsley 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Wash,  pick  and  dry  the  parsley;  put  into  frying  basket  and  immerse  in 
hot  Crisco  fifteen  seconds  or  until  crisp.  Drain  and  sprinkle  with  salt  and 
pepper.  It  should  be  a  nice  green  color.  If  it  turns  black  it  has  been  too 
long  in  the  fat. 

Green  Peas  a  la  Maitre  d'Hotel 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  tablespoonful  lemon  juice 

1  quart  shelled  peas  2  sprigs  mint 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste      '  1  tablespoonful  chopped  parsley 

1  teaspoonful  sugar 

Shell  peas  and  throw  into  plenty  boiling  water  containing  a  teaspoon- 
ful of  salt,  sugar,  and  mint;  boil  fast  until  tender,  then  drain.  Mix  lemon 
juice  with  Crisco  and  parsley;  stir  this  among  peas,  reheat  them,  and 
serve  at  once. 

Jerusalem  Artichokes 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  \}/2  cupfuls  milk 

1  lb.  artichokes  2  tablespoonfuls  cream 

2  tablespoonfuls  flour  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

1  yolk  of  egg  1  teaspoonful  chopped  parsley 

2  teaspoonfuls  lemon  juice  %  cupful  vinegar 

1  pint  boiling  milk 

Wash  and  scrape  artichokes,  and  throw  each  one  in  cold  water  con- 
taining vinegar;  when  all  are  done,  rinse  in  water  and  put  into  boiling  milk, 
add  cupful  of  boiling  water  and  teaspoonful  of  salt.  Boil  quickly  with  lid 
off,  pierce  with  fork  to  know  if  done.  Lift  into  hot  dish  and  cover  with 
sauce.  Blend  Crisco  and  flour  in  saucepan,  over  fire,  add  milk,  salt  and 
pepper,  and  cook  five  minutes.  Remove  from  fire,  add  egg  beaten  with 
cream  and  lemon  juice,  pour  over  artichokes  and  sprinkle  parsley  over  top. 

69 


Vegetables 

Mushrooms  au  Gratin 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  tabiespoonful  chopped  parsley 

14  large  mushrooms  2  tablespoonfuls  chopped 

1  egg  cooked  meat 

Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper        2  tablespoonfuls  breadcrumbs 
to  taste  yi  cupful  stock 

1  tabiespoonful  chopped  suet 

Beat  up  egg,  add  suet,  breadcrumbs,  meat,  parsley,  and  seasonings. 
Wash  and  remove  centers  from  mushrooms,  season  with  salt,  pepper,  and 
red  pepper,  also  place  tiny  piece  of  Crisco  in  each.  Then  put  heaping 
teaspoonful  of  forcemeat  in  each  one,  and  cover  with  crumbs.  Lay  on 
C^scoed  tin,  add  stock,  and  bake  fifteen  minutes.  Serve  on  hot  dish  with 
gravy  poured  round. 

Sufficient  for  fourteen  mushrooms. 

New  Potatoes  a  la  France 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  salt 

2  lbs.  new  potatoes  1  tabiespoonful  chopped  parsley 
2  sprigs  mint  1  tabiespoonful  lemon  juice 

Wash  and  scrape  potatoes.  With  round  vegetable  cutter  scoop  out 
from  potatoes  a  number  of  little  balls  like  marbles;  boil  these  till  tender 
in  water,  to  which  have  been  added  salt  and  mint.  Drain,  add  Crisco, 
parsley,  and  lemon  juice.  Toss  them  about  gently  in  pan  a  few  minutes, 
and  serve  on  hot  dish. 

Potato  Pone 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger 

1  generous  cupful  grated  raw      }4  teaspoonful  powdered  cinnamon 

sweet  potatoes  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

1  cupful  molasses  1  tabiespoonful  chopped 

1  cupfill  milk  candied  orange  peel 

yi  cupful  sugar 

Grate  potatoes  or  put  them  through  meat  chopper,  add  molasses, 
sugar,  milk,  Crisco,  salt,  spices,  and  orange  peel.  Mix  well,  turn  into 
Criscoed  fireproof  dish  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  till  firm. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  pone. 

Savory  Lentil  Dish 

4  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  Salt,  pepper,  and  powdered 
1  cupful  lentils  mace  to  taste 

1  bay  leaf  1  cupful  boiled  rice 

3  sprigs  parsley  Xyi  cupfuls  highly  seasoned 
1  chopped  onion  tomato  sauce 

Wash  lentils  and  soak  in  plenty  of  cold  water  four  hours.  Put  into 
boiling  salt  water,  add  bay  leaf,  parsley,  seasonings  and  cook  till  tender. 

70 


Vegetables 

Chop  and  fry  onion  in  3  tables poonfuls  of  Crisco,  add  lentils,  rice  and 
remainder  of  Crisco,  stir  and  allow  to  get  hot.  Turn  into  hot  dish  and  pour 
over  tomato  sauce. 

Stuffed  Beets 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  2  tablespoonfuls  breadcrumbs 

6  beets  }4  teaspoonful  onion  juice 

2  green  peppers  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Watercress 

Select  6  smooth  even-sized  beets  and  boil  in  boiling  salted  water  until 
tender.  Peel,  remove  root  end  and  remove  center,  leaving  shell  about 
half  inch  thick.  Remove  stems  and  seeds  from  peppers;  cover  peppers 
with  boiling  water  ten  minutes.  Dice  them  with  scooped  out  beet,  add 
Crisco,  breadcrumbs,  and  seasonings.  Mix  and  divide  into  beet  shells, 
dot  with  Crisco  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  twenty  minutes.  Serve  gar- 
nished with  watercress. 

Sufficient  for  six  beets. 

Stuffed  Eggplant 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  egg 

3  small  eggplants  Salt,  pepper,  and  nutmeg  to 

}4  cupful  breadcrumbs  taste 

lyi  cupfuls  stock  }4  cupful  white  wine 

yi  cupful  chopped  cooked  Criscoed  crumbs 

chicken  or  veal  1  tablespoonful  flour 

1  tablespoonful  sherry 

Cut  eggplants  in  halves  and  scoop  out  inside,  leaving  shell  half  inch 
thick.  Soak  >^  cupful  breadcrumbs  in  yi  cupful  stock  ten  minutes,  then 
add  cooked  chicken,  2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco,  egg,  well  beaten, 
and  seasoning  of  salt,  pepper  and  nutmeg.  Divide  this  forcemeat  into 
eggplants,  sprinkle  Criscoed  crumbs  on  top,  set  them  in  greased  pan,  pour 
in  rest  of  stock  and  white  wine  and  bake  half  hour  in  moderate  oven. 
Serve  on  hot  dish  with  following  sauce. 

Put  1  tablespoonful  Crisco  and  1  tablespoonful  flour  into  saucepan  and 
blend  over  fire,  add  sherry  and  1  cupful  liauor  from  pan  in  which  they  were 
baked,  and  cook  five  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  three  eggplants. 

Stuffed  Potatoes 

(Kau  B.    Vaughn) 

2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         2  tablespoonfuls  grated  cheese 
6  large  potatoes  1  yolk  of  egg 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Wash  six  well  shaped  white  potatoes  and  rub  skin  with  Crisco.  Bake 
until  tender,  cut  slice  oflF  one  end,  and  with  a  teaspoon  remove  all  potato 
from  shells.  Mash  the  potato,  adding  Crisco,  cheese,  seasonings,  and  egg 
yolk.     Refill  shells  and  bake  fifteen  minutes.    Serve  hot  on  napkin. 

Sufficient  for  six  potatoes. 

71 


Vegetables 


Viennese  Carrots 


2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 
1  bunch  carrots 
1  tablespoonful  flour 
yi  teaspoonful  sugar 


2  tablespoonfuls  vinegar 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 
1  tablespoonful  chopped  parsley 
1  cupful  cooked  peas 


Scrape  carrots,  cut  in  small  pieces,  and  boil  till  tender  in  boiling  salted 
water.  Blend  Crisco  and  flour  together  in  saucepan  over  fire,  stir  in  1  cup- 
ful water  in  which  carrots  were  cooked,  boil  five  minutes,  then  add  sugar, 
seasonings,  vinegar,  parsley,  peas,  and  carrots;  simmer  ten  minutes  and 
serve  hot  in  vegetable  dish. 


r^ 


72 


S^i 


ALADS  are  classified  into  two  groups — 
i.e.,  the  raw,  such  as  lettuce,  endive, 
radishes,  cucumber,  celery,  etc.,  and 
the  cooked,  such  as  those  made  from 
cooked  vegetables,  eggs,  cooked  cold  fish,  poultry,  and  meat. 
The  raw  materials  should  be  washed  most  carefully  and  well 
cleaned  before  mixing,  and  the  utensils  for  cutting  and  mixing, 
as  well  as  the  basins  or  bowls  used,  should  be  clean  and  dry. 
Every  salad,  no  matter  how  plain  and  sirnple  it  may  be,  should 
be  made  to  look  inviting  and  tempting.  The  method  of  drain- 
ing or  drying  is  a  very  easy  performance  so  long  as  the  salad 
leaves,  whatever  they  may  be,  are  almost  free  from  moisture. 
This  is  eflPected  best  by  putting  the  leaves,  which  should  be 
broken,  not  cut  with  a  knife,  into  a  wire  basket  and  drying 
them  well,  or  else  putting  them  into  a  cloth  lightly  folded  and 
shaking  well  until  the  outer  moisture  of  the  leaves  is  well 
absorbed.     The  salad  then  is  ready  for  mixing. 

Any  cold  boiled  vegetables  left  over  from  dinner  are  use- 
ful as  giving  variety  to  salads,  and  help  to  make  a  good 
accompaniment  to  cold  meat  served  to  luncheon.  Thinly 
sliced  cold  potatoes — new  ones  for  choice,  green  peas  and  string 
beans,  are  especially  good  for  this  purpose,  and  even  Brussels 
sprouts,  carrots,  and  turnips  may  be  used  on  occasion  in  small 
quantities.  More  substantial  salads,  prepared  with  cold  meat 
or  fish,  form  appetizing  luncheon  or  breakfast  dishes.  Those 
made  with  chicken,  lobster  and  salmon  respectively  are  most 
widely  known,  but  fillets  of  flounder,  cold  ham  or  beef,  or 
lamb  make  very  good  salads,  and  even  the  humble  herring, 
and  dried  and  salted  fish,  may  be  used  with  advantage  in 
this  way. 

The  meat  or  fish  should  be  cut  up  into  cubes  or  convenient 
small  pieces,  and  piled  up  in  the  center  of  the  dish  or 
salad  bowl  on  a  layer  of  seasoned,  shredded  lettuce.  Over 
this  should  be  poured  half  of  the  dressing. 
Round  this  should  be  arranged  the  green  j|l 

73 


Salads 

constituents  of  the  salad,  cut  up  rather  small,  garnished 
with  slices  of  tomato  or  beets,  cucumber  and  hard-cooked  egg. 
The  remainder  of  the  dressing  should  be  poured  over  this,  and 
the  top  of  the  meat  or  fish  pyramid  may  be  ornamented  with  a 
few  sprigs  of  endive  or  parsley. 

Apple,  Celery  and  Nut  Salad 

For  Dressing 

1  tablespoftnful  Crisco  }4  teaspoonful  white  pepper 

1  teaspoonful  mustard  2  eggs 

1  teaspoonful  sugar  4  tablespoonfuls  lemon  juice 

}4  teaspoonful  salt  1  cupful  whipped  cream 

For  Salad 

1  quart  chopped  apples  1)4  cupfuls  blanched  and  shred- 

1  pint  diced  celery  ded  almonds 

^  cupful  rolled  pecan  nut  meats 

For  salad.     Mix  apples,  celery  and  nut  meats. 

For  dressing.  Melt  Crisco,  add  mustard,  sugar,  salt,  pepper,  yolks 
of  eggs  well  beaten,  and  lemon  juice.  Cook  in  double  boiler  till  it  thickens, 
then  add  whites  of  eggs  stiffly  beaten.  Chill  and  add  whipped  cream  just 
before  serving.     Dressing  should  be  mixed  with  fruit. 

Asparagus  Salad 

For  Dressing 

6  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  1  tablespoonful  chopped 
1  teaspoonful  salt  cucumber  pickles 

}4  teaspoonful  paprika  1  tablespoonful  chopped  green 
Pinch  black  pepper  peppers 

1  tablespoonful  tarragon  1  teaspoonful  chopped  parsley 

vinegar  1  teaspoonful  chopped  chives 

2  tablespoonfuls  cider  vinegar         1  can  asparagus  or  fresh  cooked 

asparagus 

Drain  asparagus  and  chill.  Mix  salt  with  paprika,  add  pepper,  tar- 
ragon vinegar,  cider  vinegar,  Crisco,  pickles,  peppers,  parsley,  and  chives, 
mix  well  and  pour  over  the  asparagus. 

Celery  and  Almond  Salad 

1  cupful  melted  Crisco  1  crisp  lettuce 
1  yolk  of  egg  Few  drops  green  color 

1  tablespoonful  lemon  juice  yi  teaspoonful  sugar 

1  tablespoonful  vinegar  1  teaspoonful  salt 

1  head  celery  ^  teaspoonful  mustard 
}4  cupful  blanched  almonds  Red  pepper  to  taste 

Melt  and  cool  Crisco.  Prepare  celery  and  cut  into  very  thin  strips 
and  plunge  in  ice  water  until  wanted.  Blanch  and  shred  almonds;  wash 
and  dry  lettuce  leaves.    Put  yolk  of  egg  into  bowl,  add  mustard,  salt,  and 

74 


Salads 

red  pepper  and  mix  well  with  wooden  spoon.  Add  sugar,  teaspoonful 
lemon  juice,  teaspoonful  vinegar;  beat  in  Crisco  gradually.  Remove 
spoon  and  beat  with  egg  beater  five  minutes,  then  beat  in  rest  of  lemon 
juice  and  vinegar.  Add  more  seasonings  if  needed  and  enough  green 
color  to  make  it  look  pretty.  Dry  celery  and  mix  with  almonds,  then 
toss  them  into  dressing.     Serve  on  lettuce  leaves. 

Fruit  Salad 
Dressing 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  2  tablespoonfuls  vinegar 
Pinch  of  salt  2  eggs 

2  tablespoonfuls  sugar  j/t  pint  whippedcream 

Salad 

24  marshmallows  2  juicy  apples 

1  can  pineapple  6  oranges 

Lettuce  leaves 

For  salad.  Cut  fruit  and  marshmallows  into  small  pieces,  then  mix 
and  chill. 

For  dressing.  Beat  up  eggs  in  double  boiler,  add  vinegar,  sugar, 
salt,  Crisco  and  cook  until  thick.  Cool  and  add  whipped  cream.  Mix  with 
fruit  and  serve  on  crisp  lettuce  leaves. 

Orange  and  Tomato  Salad 

3  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         1  tablespoonful  chopped  parsley 

4  tomatoes  Tarragon  vinegar 

4  oranges  Salt 

Peel  oranges  and  tomatoes,  and  slice  and  arrange  alternately  in  salad 
bowl.  Mix  juice  squeezed  from  "tops  and  bottoms"  of  oranges  with  an 
equal  quantity  of  tarragon  vinegar,  add  Crisco  and  salt  to  taste.  Pour 
over  fruit  and  sprinkle  chopped  parsley  on  top. 

Potato  and  Nut  Salad 
For  Dressing  For  Salad 

5  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         3  cupfuls  sliced  cold  potatoes 
1  teaspoonful  mustard  1  pupful  broken  hickory  nut 

1  teaspoonful  salt  meats 

2  teaspoonfuls  sugar  1  teaspoonful  chopped  onion 
2  yolks  of  eggs  Chopped  parsley 

^  cupful  cream  or  milk  Cold  cooked  sliced  beets 

yi  cupful  vinegar  Sliced  lemon 

Lettuce  leaves 

For  dressing.  Mix  sugar,  salt,  and  mustard,  add  Crisco  and  stir 
thoroughly;  then  add  yolks  of  eggs  well  beaten,  cream,  and  lastly  vinegar. 
Cook  in  double  boiler  until  consistency  of  cream.  If  milk  is  used  instead 
of  cream,  add  1  teaspoonful  flour  to  other  dry  ingredients. 

For  salad.  Mix  potatoes,  nuts,  and  onion  together,  and  place  on 
crisp  lettuce  leaves;  pour  over  dressing  and  garnish  to  taste  with  beets, 
lemon,  and  parsley. 

75 


Salads 


Potato  and  Pimiento  Salad 


1  tablespoonful  Crisco  K  can  pimientos 

4  potatoes  1  tablespoonful  chopped 

2  hard-cooked  eggs  cucumber  pickle 

1  teaspoonful  salt 

Dressing 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  2  tablespoonfuls  sugar 

2  teaspoonfuls  dry  mustard  1  lemon 

1  teaspoonful  salt  y^  pint  vinegar 

2  eggs 

For  salad.  Boil  potatoes  and  slice  them,  add  Crisco  and  salt.  Now 
chop  pickles,  eggs,  and  pimientoes  and  add  them  and  set  in  cool  place  to 
chill. 

For  dressing.  Put  vinegar  into  double  boiler,  add  strained  lemon  juice, 
sugar,  salt,  mustard,  then  add  Crisco  and  eggs  well  beaten.  Cook  until 
thick,  then  cool  and  use. 

Shrimp  Salad 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  lemon 

1  can  shrimps  4  tablespoonfuls  vinegar 

1  cupful  celery  cut  in  cubes  2  tablespoonfuls  water 

1  cupful  tart  apples  cut  in  4  eggs 

cubes  1  teaspoonful  dry  mustard 

1  cupful  broken  Brazil  nut  1  teaspoonful  salt 

meats  1  teaspoonful  sugar 

}^  cupful  broken  English  y^  teaspoonful  white  pepper 

walnut  meats  yi  cupful  thick  cream  and  1 
Salt  and  pepper  to  taste  cupful  whipped  cream 

Crisp  lettuce  leaves 

Break  shrimps  into  pieces,  put  them  into  earthenware  dish,  moisten 
with  a  little  melted  Crisco,  season  with  vinegar,  salt  and  pepper.  Put 
apple  cubes  into  a  small  dish  and  sprinkle  lightly  with  lemon  juice,  then 
put  in  celery  cubes  with  a  little  more  lemon  juice  and  toss  together.  Cover 
and  set  aside.  Prepare  nut  meats.  Heat  vinegar  and  water  in  double 
boiler,  beat  eggs,  then  gradually  add  them  to  vinegar,  stirring  all  the  time. 
Now  add  Crisco  and  cook  slowly,  stirring  constantly.  Remove  from  fire, 
and  beat  till  cold,  then  add  mustard,  salt,  sugar,  and  pepper.  Add  the 
thick  cream  just  before  serving.  When  ready  to  serve  toss  nnits,  celery, 
apples  and  shrimps  together  with  a  silver  fork,  and  add  a  little  dressing. 
Heap  on  crisp  lettuce  leaves  on  individual  plates,  and  pour  over  each  salad 
a  heaping  spoonful  of  the  dressing;  and  top  with  spoonful  of  unsweetened 
whipped  cream. 


76 


FIUPPM©, 


^UDDINGS  as  a  rule  either  are  boiled, 
steamed  or  baked.  For  boiled  pud- 
dings, care  should  be  taken  that  the 
saucepan  be  kept  boilingor  the  water 
will  get  into  the  pudding  and  spoil  it.  For 
pudding  cloths,  use  materials  such  as  linen 
or  cheese  cloth.  After  using,  the  cloth  must  be  thoroughly 
washed  in  plenty  of  water  with  a  little  washing  soda,  but  on 
no  account  use  soap,  and  see  that  the  cloth  is  perfectly  dry 
before  patting  it  away.  Many  puddings  are  lighter  and  better 
steamed,  and  then  instead  of  the  cloth  only  a  piece  of  Criscoed 
paper  is  required,  twisted  over  the  top  of  the  basin  or  mold. 
Very  light  puddings,  such  as  custards,  should  be  placed  in  a 
steamer.  Most  of  the  steamed  puddings  mixed  a  little  softer, 
are  excellent  baked  in  a  pudding  dish. 

In  steaming  puddings  keep  them  at  a  uniform  heat  all 
the  time,  and  be  careful  not  to  lift  the  Hd  off  the  pan  for  the 
first  half  hour.  All  farinaceous  puddings  should  be  cooked 
well,  as  then  they  are  easier  to  digest.  Cornstarch  must 
be  well  cooked,  from  eight  to  ten  minutes.  Mold  for  jellies 
or  blanc-manges  should  be  well  rinsed  with  cold  water  before 
using.  Baiters  must  be  well  beaten  and  allowed  to  stand  for 
thirty  minutes  or  longer  before  cooking,  because  the  starch 
in  the  flour  swells,  and  the  batter  will  therefore  be  lighter. 
Batter  puddings  should  be  put  into  a  quick  oven.  Puddings 
composed  principally  of  milk  and  eggs  should  be  very  gently 
cooked,  as  strong  heat  will  cause  them  to  curdle. 

In  stewing  fruit,  prepare  syrup  first.  Bring  to  boil,  lay 
fruit  in,  and  simmer  gently.  SouflHes  should  be  very  light 
and  spongy.  Eggs  form  a  large  part  of  souffles,  more  whites 
than  yolks  are  used  and  the  former  are  beaten  to  a  stiff  froth. 
All  souffles  should  be  served  quickly.  Omelets  are  com- 
posed mainly  of  eggs.  They  can  be  savory  or  sweet.  If  over- 
cooked an  omelet  will  be  tough.     To  prevent  milk  running 


Puddingi 

over  when  it  comes  to  boil,  put  spoon  in  saucepan.  Never 
leave  spoon  in  saucepan  if  you  wish  the  contents  to  cook  quick- 
ly, and  in  any  case  a  metal  spoon  never  should  be  allowed  to 
stand  in  a  boiling  saucepan  containing  fruit  or  any  acid. 

Apple  Dumplings 

5  apples  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  ^  cupful  milk 
2  cupfuls  flour  Sugar 

2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  Cinnamon 

Sift  flour,  baking  powder,  and  salt  together.  Work  in  Crisco  with 
finger  tips;  add  gradually  milk,  mixing  with  knife  to  a  nice  dough.  Roll 
yi  inch  thick,  cut  into  squares  and  lay  in  center  of  each  an  apple,  pared 
and  cored.  Fill  up  centers  with  sugar  and  cinnamon  and  take  corners  off 
the  dough  and  pinch  together.  Place  in  Criscoed  baking  pan,  dot  over 
with  sugar  and  Crisco  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  for  twenty-five  minutes 
or  till  nicely  browned.  •  Serve  hot  with  milk. 

Sufficient  for  five  dumplings. 

Apple  Fritters 

IK  cupfuls  flour  ^  cupful  milk 

2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  3  apples  cut  in  quarter  inch 

}4  teaspoonful  salt  slices 

1  egg  .  ,     3  tablespoonfuls  sugar 

1  tablespoonful  melted  Crisco  1  lemon 

Peel,  core  and  slice  apples,  then  sprinkle  2  tablespoonfuls  sugar  and 
strained  juice  of  the  lemon  over  them.  Sift  flour,  baking  powder,  sugar, 
and  salt  into  bowl,  add  milk  to  well  beaten  egg  and  stir  liquid  gradually 
into  dry  materials,  beating  thoroughly,  then  add  Crisco.  Cover  apple 
slices  with  batter  and  drop  them  into  plenty  of  CriscO  heated  so  that  small 
breadcrumb  browns  in  sixty  seconds.  Fry  for  four  or  five  minutes.  Drain 
and  sprinkle  with  powdered  sugar.  Any  other  fruit  may  be  substituted 
for  apples  or  a  combination  of  fruits  makes  a  delicious  fritter. 

Sufficient  for  twelve  fritters. 

Baked  Rhubarb  Pudding 

2  cupfuls  flour  1  lemon 

}4  teaspoonful  salt  6  tablespoonfuls  brown  sugar 

2  bundles  rhubarb  Water 

}/2  cupful  Crisco  }4  cupful  granulated  sugar 

Put  granulated  sugar  into  small  saucepan  over  fire,  and  when  brown, 
coat  inside  of  plain  pudding  mold  with  it.  Sift,  flour,  salt,  and  baking 
powder  together,  rub  Crisco  finely  into  it,  then  mix  whole  to  a  smooth 

78 


Puddings 

paste  with  cold  water.  Turn  out  on  a  floured  board,  cut  off  one-third  of 
It,  and  put  one  side  for  the  lid.  Roll  out  remainder  until  twice  the  cir- 
cumference of  the  top  of  the  mold,  then  drop  gently  into  mold,  pressing 
evenly  against  sides.  Fill  center  with  rhubarb,  cut  in  pieces  an  inch  long. 
Add  grated  rind  and  strained  juice  of  half  of  the  lemon,  brown  sugar  and 
3  tablespoonfuls  water.  Roll  out  pastry  that  was  put  on  one  side,  wet 
edges  of  it,  lay  it  on  top.  Cover  with  a  piece  of  greased  paper,  and  bake 
in  moderate  oven  one  hour.    Turn  out  and  serve  with  hot  milk. 


Caramel  Bread  Pudding 

3  cupfuls  breadcrumbs  Grated  nutmeg  to  taste 

1  quart  hot  milk  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

2  eggs  1  cupful  sugar 

1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract  4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 

Whipped  cream 

Put  Crisco,  crumbs,  and  salt  into  a  basin,  add  hot  milk  and  soak  ten 
minutes.  Melt  sugar  and  brown  it  lightly  in  a  small  pan  over  fire,  then 
add  it  to  the  bread,  with  eggs  well  beaten,  and  flavorings.  Pour  into 
Criscoed  pudding  dish  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  till  firm.  Serve  with 
whipped  cream. 

Caramel  Rice  Pudding 

}4  cupful  rice  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

}4  teaspoonful  lemon  extract  2  cupfuls  milk 

3  eggs  }4  cupful  sultana  raisins 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  2  tablespoonfuls  powdered  sugar 

)4  cupful  granulated  sugar 

Melt  granulated  sugar  in  small  saucepan  and  cook  until  brown,  but 
do  not  burn;  pour  it  while  hot  into  pudding  mold  and  spread  it  all  over 
inside.  Wash  rice,  parboil,  drain,  and  cook  slowly  in  milk  thirty  minutes; 
turn  into  basin,  add  powdered  sugar,  Crisco,  salt,  raisins,  extract,  and  eggs 
well  beaten  and  pour  into  prepared  mold.  Set  mold  in  pan  of  boiling  water 
and  bake  in  oven  till  quite  set.    Turn  out  and  serve  hot  or  cold. 


Carrot  Pudding 
For  Pudding 

1  cupful  brown  sugar  }4  cupful  milk 

1  cupful  grated  carrots  1}4  cupfuls  flour 

1  cupful  grated  raw  potatoes  1  teaspoonful  salt 

^  cupful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

1  cupful  seeded  raisins  1  teaspoonful  mixed  spices 

yi  cupful  breadcrumbs  1  cupful  currants 

Prune  sauce 

79 


Puddingj 

For  Sauce 

^  lb.  prunes  1  lemon 

1  wineglassful  sherry  wine  }4  teaspoonful  powdered  cinnamon 

For  pudding.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  carrots,  potatoes, 
raisins,  currants,  crumbs,  flour,  baking  powder,  salt,  and  milk.  Turn  into 
Criscoed  mold,  cover,  and  steam  steadily  for  three  hours. 

For  saucr.  Soak  prunes  in  water  over  night,  after  first  washing  them. 
Next  day  put  them  in  pan  with  water  they  were  soaked  in,  just  enough 
to  cover  them,  simmer  gently  until  quite  soft.  Do  not  allow  to  boil,  or 
fruit  will  be  spoiled.  Take  out  stones,  crack  some,  and  save  kernels. 
Rub  prunes  through  sieve,  add  sherry,  kernels  blanched,  grated  rind  and 
strained  lemon  juice,  and  cinnamon,  and  then,  if  thicker  than  rich  cream, 
add  more  wine,  or  water,  and  use. 


Chocolate  Jelly 

2  squares  chocolate  4  tablespoonfuls  cornstarch 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  %  teaspoonful  salt 

2  cupfuls  boiling  water  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 
^  cupful  sugar  J^  cupful  chopped  walnut  meats 

Whipped  cream 

Break  chocolate  into  small  pieces,  dissolve  in  boiling  water,  add  Crisco, 
salt,  cornstarch  mixed  with  sugar,  stir  and  boil  for  eight  minutes.  Remove 
from  fire  add  vanilla  and  nuts  and  pour  at  once  into  wet  mold.  Cool,  turn 
out  and  serve  with  whipped  cream. 


Cottage  Pudding 

1  cupful  sugar  2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 

1  egg  2yi  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

1  cupful  milk  or  water  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

2}4  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

1  cupful  sultana  raisins 


Sauce 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  flour 

1  cupful  sugar  yi  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

1  egg  \yi  cupfuls  boiling  water 

For  pudding.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  egg  well  beaten, 
milk,  vanilla,  flour,  baking  powder,  salt,  and  raisins.  Mix  well,  turn  into 
greased  mold,  and  bake  twenty-five  minutes  in  moderate  oven.    Turn  nut 

80 


Puddings 

and    serve   with    sauce.     This    pudding    may    be    steamed    for    one    and 
a  half  hours. 

For  sauce.  Mix  flour,  sugar,  and  Crisco  in  small  saucepan,  then  stir  in 
egg  and  boiling  water  and  boil  for  three  minutes.    Flavor  with  the  vanilla. 

Molasses  Sponge  Pudding 

2  cupfuls  flour  y2  cupful  molasses 

2  teaspoonfuls  powdered  ginger      1  egg 

K  teaspoonful  baking  soda  1  tablespoonful  breadcrumbs 

H  cupful  Crisco  K  cupful  milk 

yi  teaspoonful  salt 

For  Sauce 

1  teaspoonful  Crisco  2  tablespoonfuls  lemon  juice 

1  teaspoonful  cornstarch  3  tablespoonfuls  molasses 

1  cupful  hot  water 

For  pudding.  Mix  flour,  breadcrumbs,  soda  and  ginger  together,  then 
rub  in  Crisco  with  finger  tips.  Beat  egg,  add  milk,  molasses,  salt  and 
stir  into  dry  ingredients.  Turn  mixture  into  Criscoed  mold,  cover  with 
greased  paper  and  steam  steadily  for  two  hours.  Turn  out  and  serve  with 
sauce. 

For  sauce.  Blend  Crisco  and  cornstarch  together,  add  molasses, 
water,  and  lemon  juice,  and  boil  a  few  minutes. 

Monica  Pudding 

3  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         3  eggs 

2  cupfuls  milk  yi  cupful  sugar 

}4  cupful  flour  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

yi  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

For  Sauce 

yi  cupful  Crisco  K  cupful  cream 

yi  cupful  powdered  sugar  y^  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

For  pudding.  Heat  1  cupful  milk.  Add  other  cupful  milk  gradually 
to  flour,  then  stir  into  boiling  milk,  stir  and  cook  five  minutes.  The  mix- 
ture should  be  quite  smooth.  Remove  from  fire,  add  Crisco,  sugar,  yolks 
of  eggs  well  beaten,  salt,  vanilla,  and  whites  of  eggs  stiffly  beaten.  Turn 
into  Criscoed  baking  dish,  set  in  pan  half  full  of  boiling  water.  Bake  in 
moderate  oven  thirty-five  minutes.     Serve  with  sauce. 

For  sauce.  Melt  Crisco,  add  sugar,  cream  and  vanilla  extract  and 
bring  to  boil. 

Noodle  Pudding 

1  pint  noodles  1  lemon 

^  cupful  sugar  K  cupful  blanched  and  chopped 

4  eggs  almonds 
yi  cupful  melted  Crisco  2  cupfuls  milk 

y^  teaspoonful  salt 

Throw  noodles  into  boiling  salted  water,  and  cook  five  minutes. 
Drain  in  colander.  Beat  eggs  until  light  and  stir  in  the  noodles.  Grease 
pudding  dish  with  Crisco,  put  in  layer  of  noodles,  sprinkle  with  sugar, 
almonds,  grated  lemon  peel,  and  melted  Crisco.    Then  add  another  layer  of 

81 


Puddingf 

noodles  and  proceed  as  before,  until  all  ^re  used  up.  Add  milk  and  salt, 
and  bake  one  hour  in  moderate  oven.  Serve  hot  with  milk  or  cream.  This 
pudding  is  delicious  with  stewed  fruits. 

Peach  Delights 

1  quart  flour  Milk 

3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  1  egg 

2  tablespoonfuls  sugar  1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 
J^  cupful  Crisco  Peaches,  fresh  or  canned 
}4  teaspoonful  salt                              Whipped  cream 

Sift  flour,  salt,  sugar,  and  baking  powder  together,  then  rub  Crisco 
lightly  into  them  with  finger  tips;  add  lemon  extract  and  enough  milk  to 
make  soft  dough.  Drop  mixture  into  Criscoed  gem  pans;  place  K  peach 
on  each  one;  fill  cavities  with  sugar  and  bake  in  hot  oven  twenty-five 
minutes.     Serve  with  whipped  and  sweetened  cream. 

Sufficient  for  twenty  delights. 

Puieapple  Puddhig 
For  Pudding 

1  can  pineapple  1  cupful  breadcrumbs 

1  cupful  sugar  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

4  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco     6  eggs 

Hard  sauce 

For  Sauce 

4  tablespoonfuls  sugar  2  tablespoonfuls  sherry 

}4  teaspoonful  salt  4  tablespoonfuls  blanched  and 

yi  cupful  Crisco  chopped  almonds 

For  pudding.  Beat  eggs,  add  crumbs,  salt,  Crisco,  sugar,  and  pine- 
apple cut  into  small  dice.  Turn  into  Criscoed  pudding  dish  and  bake 
in  moderate  oven  until  firm.     Serve  hot  or  cold  with  sauce. 

For  sauce.  Beat  Crisco  with  sugar  to  a  cream,  add  salt,  sherry,  and 
almonds. 

Mrs.  Vaughn^s  Plum  Puddmg 

}4  lb.  brown  sugar  }4  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

3  eggs  /4  teaspoonful  powdered  mace 
yi  lb.  breadcrumbs                         J4  cupful  New  Orleans 

}4  lb.  browned  flour  molasses 

}4  lb.  Crisco  y2  cupful  brandy  (or  grape  juice) 

2  teaspoonfuls  baking  }4  cupful  lemon  juice 

powder  ^2  lb.  seeded  raisins 
1  teaspoonful  salt  ^  lb.  sultana  raisins 
}4  teaspoonful  powdered  cloves  1  lb.  currants 
J^  teaspoonful  powdered  1  lb.  crystallized  fruits,  consist- 
cinnamon  ing    of    pineapple,    cherries, 
1  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger  figs,  orange  peel,   and  citron 

Chop  crystallized  fruits,  add  raisins  and  currants,  then  pour  brandy  (or 
grape  juice)  over  them  and  let  stand  several  hours.     Cream  Crisco  and 

82 


Puddings 

sugar,  add  eggs  well  beaten  together,  and  all  other  ingredients.  Divide 
into  greased  mold  (small  Crisco  cans  will  do)  filling  two-thirds  full  and 
steam  steadily  for  three  hours.  Turn  out  while  hot  and  serve  with  hard 
sauce. 

Sufficient  for  two  medium-sized  puddings  or  one  very  large  one. 

Rice  Pudding 

^  cupful  rice  3  eggs 

3  cupfuls  milk  Powdered  cinnamon  to  taste 
^  cupful  sugar                                }4  cupful  seeded  raisins 

}^  cupful  Crisco  ^  teaspoonful  salt 

Wash  rice  and  steam  it  in  milk  until  thick,  then  allow  to  cool.  Cream 
Crisco  and  sugar,  add  well  beaten  eggs,  raisins,  salt,  rice,  and  cinnamon. 
Grease  pudding  dish  with  Crisco,  pour  in  mixture  and  bake  one  hour  in 
moderate  oven. 

Walnut  Pudding 

J/3  cupful  sugar  2  eggs 

2  cupfuls  flour  1  cupful  milk 

2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

4  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  1  cupful  chopped  English 
}4  teaspoonful  salt  walnut  meats 

For  Sauce 

1  cupful  sugar  3  yolks  eggs 

}4  cupful  water  2  cupfuls  whipped  cream 

J^  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

Mix  flour,  sugar,  salt  and  baking  powder  together,  add  eggs  well 
beaten,  vanilla  extract,  milk,  Crisco,  and  nuts.  Mix  well  and  divide  into  9 
greased  individual  molds,  cover  with  greased  papers,  and  steam  steadily 
for  three-quarters  of  an  hour.     Turn  out  and  serve. 

For  sauce.  Boil  sugar  and  water  till  syrup  spins  a  thread,  pour  over 
beaten  yolks  of  eggs,  and  stir  quickly.  Set  aside  to  cool,  stir  occasion- 
ally, add  lemon  extract  and  just  before  serving  mix  in  whipped  cream. 

Sufficient  for  nine  individual  puddings. 


Woodford  Pudding 

(.Kate  B.  Vaughn) 

1  cupful  sugar  1>^  cupfuls  flour 

3  eggs  y2  cupful  Crisco 

y2  cupful  buttermilk  1  cupful  blackberry  jam 

1  teaspoonful  baking  soda  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

yi  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

83 


Puddings 

For  Sauce 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  .  Powdered  sugar 

1  cupful  whipped  cream  }4  teaspoonfui  salt 

For  pudding.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  salt,  eggs  well 
beaten,  nutmeg,  flour,  soda  mixed  with  buttermilk,  and  jam.  Mix  well  and 
turn  into  Criscoed  pudding  dish  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  thirty  minutes 
or  until  firm. 

For  sauce.  Cream  Crisco  and  beat  in  as  much  powdered  sugar  as  it 
will  take  up,  add  salt,  and  stir  over  boiling  water  until  it  becomes  liquid, 
flavor  with  vanilla  extract  or  sherry,  and  just  before  serving  add  cream. 
Serve  hot  with  pudding. 


84 


F  the  slices  of  bread  have  to  be  spread 
with  butter  or  with  a  paste  it  should 
be  done  before  they  are  cut  off.  The 
slices  should  not  be  cut  thicker  than  an 
eighth  of  an  inch.  When  butter  is  used  there  must  just  be 
enough  of  it  for  us  to  know  in  some  mysterious  fashion  that 
it  is  there.  Every  scrap  of  a  sandwich  should  he  eatable. 
Sandwiches  usually  are  served  on  folded  napkins,  and  arranged 
in  circles,  so  that  one  overlaps  the  other.  It  is  well  to  lay 
a  damp  napkin  over  the  sandwiches,  if  they  are  not  wanted 
immediately,  in  order  to  keep  them  moist.  To  make  superior 
sandwich  butter,  work  one  cupful  of  butter  in  a  basin  with  a 
clean  and  dry  wooden  spoon  until  soft;  then  add  by  degrees 
half  a  cupful  of  whipped  cream,  seasoning  of  salt  and  mustard, 
and  put  it  in  a  cool  place  until  required. 

'     Egg  and  Anchovy  Sandwiches 

3  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         1  teaspoonful  curry  powder 

10  anchovies  ^  teaspoonful  lemon  juice 

3  hard-cooked  eggs  Salt  to  taste 
2  tablespoonfuls  grated  cheese  Brown  bread 

Watercress 

Bone  anchovies,  put  them  in  basin  or  mortar  with  eggs,  cheese,  and  one 
tablespoonful  Crisco,  and  pound  all  well  together.  Mix  remaining  Crisco 
with  curry  powder,  lemon  juice,  and  salt  to  taste.  Cut  some  thin  brown 
bread,  spread  with  curry  mixture  and  layer  of  anchovy  paste.  Lay  another 
piece  of  bread  on  top,  and  cut  into  fancy  shapes.  Arrange  on  a  lace  paper 
and  garnish  with  watercress. 

Sufficient  for  fifteen  sandwiches. 

Fried  Egg  Sandwiches 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper 

4  hard-cooked  eggs  to  taste 

2  tablespoonfuls  cream  2  rasped  rolls 

Fritter  batter 
Cut  hard-cooked   eggs  free  from    shells    into  slices  and  pound  with 
Crisco  and  cream  to  a  paste.     Season  with  salt,  pepper,  j/^ 

and  red  pepper.     Cut  rolls  into  thin  slices,  butter  them,  ^\^ 


Sandwiches 

■  spread  them  with  the  mixture  and  make  into  small  sandwiches.  Dip  each 
sandwich  into  some  prepared  fritter  batter,  and  fry  to  golden  brown  in  hot 
Crisco.    Drain  and  serve  hot. 

Sufficient  for  twelve  sandwiches. 

Hudson  Sandwiches 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

}4  lb.  cooked  rteat  Crisp  lettuce  leaves 

6  stoned  olives  12  picked  shrimps 

1  teaspoonful  capers  Parsley 

2  hard-cooked  eggs  Brown  bread 

Put  through  food  chopper  cooked  meat,  olives,  capers,  and  yolks  of 
hard  cooked  eggs,  then  add  Crisco  and  seasonings.  Spread  mixture  on 
slices  of  buttered  brown  bread,  and  stamp  them  out  with  a  round  cutter; 
sprinkle  surfates  of  sandwiches  with  chopped  whites  of  eggs.  Dish  up  in 
circular  fashion.  Put  lettuce  in  center  with  shrimps  and  a  few  sprigs  of 
parsley.    This  sandwich  quite  repays  the  trouble  of  making. 

Sufficient  for  twenty  sandwiches. 


Pimiento  Cheese  Sandwiches 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  salt 

1  cupful  diced  cheese  1  can  pimientoes 
1  teaspoonful  cornstarch  Paprika  to  taste 

6  tablespoonfuls  milk  Graham  bread 

Put  cheese  into  double  boiler,  add  Crisco,  cornstarch,  milk,  salt,  and 
paprika  to  taste  and  stir  and  cook  until  smooth,  then  add  pimientoes  cut 
into  small  pieces.     Spread  between  buttered  slices  of  graham  bread. 

Sufficient  for  twenty-five  sandwiches. 


Rice  Sandwiches 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  2  tablespoonfuls  chopped  cooked, 

}i  cupful  rice  liver 

1  sprig  parsley  2  tablespoonfuls  chopped 

1  blade  mace  cooked  ham 

1  strip  lemon  peel  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 
Bread 

Boil  rice  in  plenty  of  boiling  salted  water,  add  parsley,  mace,  and 
lemon  peel.  When  quite  tender  strain  off  water,  take  out  parsley  mace, 
and  lemon,  and  stir  into  the  rice,  liver,  Crisco,  ham,  and  seasonings.  Cut 
an  even  number  of  slices  of  bread,  spread  mixture  when  cold  on  one-half, 
and  cover  with  remaining  slices  of  bread.  Trim  and  cut  into  diamond 
shapes. 

Sufficient  for  twenty  sandwiches. 

86 


Sandwielus 

Sardine  Sandwiches 

2  tablespoonfuls  melted  1  tomato 

Crisco  Salt,  pepper,  and  paprika 

1  dozen  sardines  to  taste 

1  tablespoonful  whipped  Lettuce  leaves 

cream  Slices  of  brown  or  white  bread 

Bone  and  skin  the  sardines,  then  rub  through  sieve,  add  cream, 
Crisco,  pulp  of  tomato  and  seasonings  and  mix  well.  Spread  mixture 
between  slices  of  brown  or  white  bread  and  butter,  stamp  out  in  rounds, 
in  center  of  each  round  force  a  row  of  whipped  cream  seasoned  with  salt 
and  red  pepper,  place  small  stamped  out  leaves  of  lettuce  round  the  cream. 

Sufficient  for  twelve  sandwiches. 


Tomato  Sandwiches 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  I  tablespoonful  flour 

1  cupful  water  l}4  tablespoonfuls  sugar 
}4  cupful  vinegar  Few  grains  red  pepper 

2  eggs  well  beaten  Firm  ripe  tomatoes 
1  teaspoonful  salt  Bread 

1  teaspoonful  mustard  Whipped  cream 

Mix  sugar,  flour,  salt,  mustard  and  red  pepper  together,  add  eggs, 
vinegar,  Crisco,  and  water  and  cook  in  double  boiler  until  thick,  stirring 
all  the  time.  To  every  tablespoonful  of  dressing  add  equal  quantity  of 
whipped  cream.  Skin  and  slice  tomatoes  very  thin,  dip  slices  into  dressing 
and  place  between  thin  slices  of  buttered  bread.  Cut  into  finger  shaped 
pieces. 

Sufficient  for  thirty  sandwiches. 


Tomato  and  Horseradish  Sandwiches 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  Bread 

}4  cupful  grated  horseradish  }4  cupful  mayonnaise 

1  tomato  Salt  and  paprika  to  taste 

Parsley 

Mix  Crisco,  horseradish,  and  mayonnaise  together.  Skin  and  slice 
tomato,  sprinkle  with  salt  and  paprika.  Spread  thin  slices  of  bread  and 
butter  with  Crisco  mixture,  and  put  sliced  tomato  between,  cut  into  fancy 
shapes  and  garnish  with   parsley. 

Sufficient  for  ten  sandwiches. 


87 


FA-Q^TIEH 


HERE  are  two  principal  divisions, 
within  which  all  varieties  may  be  in- 
cluded, viz: 

1.  Short  or  plain  pastries. 

2.  Flaky  pastries. 

Of  these,  the  former  includes  all  pastes  in  which  the  fat  is 
mixed  evenly  with  the  dough  throughout;  the  latter,  those  in 
which,  by  one  means  or  another,  the  two  are  arranged  in 
alternate  layers.  The  short  pastes  are  the  simplest,  and  for 
this  reason  should  be  experimented  on  to  begin  with.  With 
pastry,  a  good  deal  always  depends  on  the  mixing.  The  best 
way  is  to  measure  out  the  average  quantity  of  liquid,  to  pour 
about  three-quarters  of  this  gradually  into  the  flour,  at  the  same 
time  stirring  this  briskly  with  a  knife,  so  as  to  get  it  evenly  moist- 
ened, and  then  add,  in  very  small  quantities  at  a  time,  as  much 
more  water  as  may  be  needed.  To  see,  in  this  way,  when  the 
flour  has  been  moistened  enough,  is  easy.  By  the  time  the 
first  three  parts  of  water  have  been  put  in,  most  of  it  will  have 
stuck  together  in  little  separate  rolls;  if  on  pressing  these  they 
should  not  only  cling  together,  but  readily  collect  about  them 
whatever  loose  flour  there  may  be,  suflftcient  moisture  will  have 
been  added;  but  so  long  as  the  mixture,  when  pressed,  remains 
to  some  degree  crumbly,  it  is  a  sign  that  a  little  more  water  is 
required.  When  done,  the  paste  should  stick  together,  but 
should  not  adhere  either  to  the  hands  or  to  the  basin.  If  it 
does  this  it  is  too  wet,  and  more  flour  must  be  dusted  over  it 
and  kneadfed  in  till  the  surplus  moisture  has  been  absorbed. 
A  sure  sign  of  its  having  been  mixed  properly  is  when  it  can  be 
rolled  into  a  lump,  and  the  basin  wiped  out  cleanly  with  it,  as 
with  a  cloth.  To  roll  out,  flour  the  pastry  board  slightly,  lay 
the  dough  on  it,  and  form  it  into  a  neat,  flat  oblong 
sh'kpe.  (^y\. 


^^a^scea^ 


88 


Pastries 

Press  it  out  first  a  little  with  the  roller,  and  then  roll  with 
short,  quick  strokes  to  the  thickness  required.  Always  roll 
straight  forwards,  neither  sideways  nor  obliquely.  If  the  paste 
wants  widening,  alter  its  position,  not  the  direction  of  the  roll- 
ing. At  the  beginning  of  each  stroke,  bring  the  roller  rather 
sharply  down,  so  as  to  drive  out  the  paste  in  front  of  it,  and 
take  especial  care  in  rolling  to  stop  always  just  short  of  the 
edges.  Short  pastry  differs  from  the  flaky  pastries  in  requiring 
but  one  rolling  out. 

It  should  be  handled  and  rolled  as  little  as  possible  and 
when  carefully  made  it  should  not  be  in  the  least  leathery  or 
tough.  Air  in  this  method  is  mixed  equally  throughout  the 
paste,  and  when  it  expands  in  the  oven  raises  the  paste  in  all 
directions.  The  flakiness  of  pastry  depends  upon  the  kind 
and  amount  of  shortening  used.  Crisco  makes  tenderer  crust 
than  either  lard  or  butter.  Make  pastry  in  a  cool  atmosphere 
and  on  a  cool  surface.  The  lightness  of  pastry  depends 
largely  upon  the  light  handling  in  blending  the  Crisco  with 
the  flour  and  in  the  rolling  of  the  pastry  upon  the  board. 
The  best  results  are  obtained  by  cutting  the  Crisco  into  the 
flour  with  a  knife. 

If  pastry  contains  baking  powder  it  should  be  put  into 
the  oven  as  quickly  as  possible,  but  if  it  contains  a  liberal 
sup\)ly  of  Crisco  without  baking  powder,  it  improves  by  being 
set  aside  in  a  cool  place  a  few  hours.  Pastry  that  is  light, 
dry  and  flaky,  is  separated  more  easily  by  the  gastric  fluids 
than  that  which  is  heavy.  The  flour  must  be  of  good 
quality,  fine  and  dry.  All  pastry  requires  to  be  placed  in  a 
hot  oven,  slightly  hotter  for  flaky  than  short  crust.  The 
oven  should  register  from  310°  F.  to  340°  F.  The  great  heat 
quickly  will  cause  the  starch  grains  to  burst  and  absorb  the 
fat,  otherwise  the  pastry  will  be  heavy. 

In  making  flaky  pastry,  if  it  has  been  rolled  and  folded 
properly,  and  not  allowed  to  stick  to  the  board,  nor  cut  so 
that  air  can  pass  through  layers,  this  air  when  heated  in  the 
oven  expands  and  raises  the  paste  in  layers  or  puffs.  Heat  of 
oven  must  be  great  enough  to  fix  the  pastry  in  this  raised 
condition,  and  as  cold  air  prevents  this,  the  oven  door  must 
not  be  opened  too  soon,  or  any  more  than  necessary.  See 
that  the  oven  is  clean. 


89 


Pastries 


Plain  Crisco  Pastry 


IM  cupfuls  flour  ya  teaspoonful  salt 

}4  cupful  Crisco  Cold  water 

Sift  flour  and  salt  and  cut  Crisco  into  flour  with  knife  until  finely 
divided.  Finger  tips  may  be  used  to  finish  blending  materials.  Add  gradu- 
ally sufficient  water  to  make stiflF paste.  Water  should  be  added  sparinglyand 
mixed  with  knife  through  dry  ingredients.  Form  lightly  and  quickly  with 
hand  into  dough;  roll  out  on  slightly  floured  board,  about  one-quarter  inch 
thick.  Use  light  motion  in  handling  rolling-pin,  and  roll  from  center  outward. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  pie. 

The  New  Crisco  Pastry 

2  cupfuls  flour  1  tablespoonful  lemon  juice 

fi  cupful  Crisco  Sufficient  cold  water  to  hold 

1  egg  mixture  together 

^  teaspoonful  salt 

Sift  flour  and  salt  into  basin.  Flour  blade  of  knife,  and  chop  Crisco 
into  flour,  being  careful  to  keep  flour  between  blade  of  knife  and  shorten- 
ing. When  mixture  looks  like  meal,  add  gradually,  egg  well  beaten  and 
mixed  with  lemon  juice.  Roll  pastry  into  ball  with  knife.  May  be  used 
at  once,  but  will  be  improved  if  allowed  to  stand  in  cool  place  for  one  hour. 
Should  be  rolled  out  once  and  handled  as  lightly  as  possible.  May  be  used 
for  sweet  or  savory  dishes.  Bake  in  hot  oven.  The  purpose  of  the  addition 
of  lemon  is  to  render  gluten  of  flour  more  ductile,  so  that  it  will  stretch 
rather  than  break  as  paste  is  rolled  out,  or  as  it  rises  in  oven. 

Sufficient  for  two  pies. 

Tip  Top  Pastry 

K  teaspoonful  salt  }4  cupful  Crisco 

IH  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  Cold  water 

2}4  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  lemon  juice 

Sift  and  mix  together  flour,  salt,  and  baking  powder.  Rub  in  Crisco 
with  finger  tips.  Chill  two  hours.  Then  take  out  >^  cupful,  and  to  re- 
mainder add  lemon  juice  and  cold  water  gradually  to  make  stiff^  paste. 
Knead  lightly  and  roll  into  long  narrow  strip.  Sprinkle  dough  with  half 
of  reserved  mixture  and  fold  so  as  to  make  3  layers.  Turn  halfway  round, 
roll  again  into  strip,  sprinkle  with  rest  of  mixture  and  fold  as  before.  Roll 
and  fold  twice  more,  and  pastry  is  ready  for  use  for  cakes,  puddings,  or  pies. 

Sufficient  for  two  pies. 

Cornstarch  Pastry 

1>4  cupfuls  cornstarch  ^j  teaspoonful  salt 

l}4  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

2  tablespoonfuls  sugar  1  yolk  of  egg 
}4  cupful  Crisco  Milk  to  mix 

Rub  Crisco  lightly  into  cornstarch  and  flour,  add  salt,  sugar,  baking 
powder,  beaten  yolk  of  egg,  and  sufficient  milk  to  mix  to  stiff"  paste.  Roll 
out  lightly  and  use  for  tartlets  or  one  crust  pie. 

Sufficient  for  two  large  pies. 

90 


Pastries 

Double  Pie 
Top  Layer 

1  cupful  sugai  2  cupfuls  flour 

1  cupful  sweet  milk  K  cupful  Crisco 

2  eggs  *  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

yi  teaspoonful  salt 

Under  Layer 

1  cupful  molasses  Plain  Crisco  Pastry. 

1  cupful  brown  sugar  1  lemon 

1  pint  hot  water  1  egg 

2  tablespoonfuls  flour 

Line  large  pie  plate  with  pastry. 

For  under  layer.  Mix  sugar  with  flour,  add  molasses,  egg  well  beaten, 
grated  lemon  rind,  and  hot  water,  and  pour  into  prepared  pie  plate. 

For  top  layer.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  eggs  well  beaten, 
milk,  salt,  flour,  and  baking  powder.  Spread  mixture  over  under  layer 
and  bake  in  hot  oven  thirty-five  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  two  large  pies. 

Almond  Layer  Pie 
For  Pastry 

2  cupfuls  flour  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

7  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Water 

For  Filling 

6  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  3  eggs 

%  cupful  sugar  H  cupful  blanched  powdered 

1  lemon  almonds 

yi  teaspoonful  salt 

Make  short  crust  of  Crisco,  flour,  salt,  and  water.  Roll  out  thin  and 
line  Criscoed  pie  plate  with  piece  of  paste. 

For  filling.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  eggs  well  beaten, 
almonds,  salt,  grated  rind  and  one  tablespoonful  lemon  juice.  Mix  well 
and  spread  one-half  of  mixture  on  to  pastry.  Then  cover  with  a  layer  of 
pastry,  the  rest  of  mixture,  and  lastly  cover  with  pastry.  Bake  in  a  moder- 
ate oven  until  brown.  Or  the  pastry  may  be  rolled  out,  brushed  over  with 
melted  Crisco,  the  mixture  spread  over  it,  and  rolled  up  to  form  a  roly- 
poly.     Lay  on  a  Criscoed  tin  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  until  brown. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  pie. 

Flake  Pastry  No.  1 

2  cupfuls  flour  f^  teaspoonful  salt 

8  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Just  enough  cold  water  to 

hold  dough  together 

Sift  flour  and  salt  and  cut  half  the  Crisco  into  flour  with  knife  until  it 
is  finely  divided.    The  finger  tips  may  be  used  to  finish  blending  materials. 

91 


Pastries 

Then  add  water  sparingly,  mixing  it  with  knife  through  dry  materials. 
Form  with  the  hand  into  dough  and  roll  out  on  a  floured  board  to  quarter 
inch  thickness.  Spread  one-third  of  remaining  Crisco  on  two-thirds  of 
dough  nearest  you;  fold  twice,  to  make  three  layers,  folding  in  first  that 
part  on  which  Crisco  has  not  been  spread.  Turn  dough,  putting  folded 
edges  to  the  sides;  roll  out,  spread  and  fold  as  before.  Repeat  once  more. 
Use  a  light  motion  in  handling  rolling-pin,  and  roll  from  center  outward. 
Should  Crisco  be  too  hard,  it  will  not  mix  readily  with  flour,  in  which  case 
the  result  will  be  a  tough  crust. 

Sufficient  for  two  covered  pies. 

Flake  Pastry  No.  2 

}4  teaspoonful  salt  l4  cupful  Crisco 

2  cupfuls  flour  Cold  water 

Mix  salt  with  flour;  divide  Crisco  into  four  equal  parts,  rub  in  one 
of  these  only,  and  then  mix  to  stiff  paste  with  a  little  cold  water.  Shape 
into  neat  oblong  piece,  and  roll  into  straight  strip  about  three  times  as 
long  as  it  is  broad.  All  over  this  put  on,  with  the  point  of  knife,  one  of 
remaining  quarters  of  Crisco,  distributing  it  evenly  in  little  dabs  about 
size  of  a  pea,  so  that  they  look  like  buttons  on  a  card.  Now  flour  surface 
lightly  and  fold  paste  exactly  in  three  by  taking  hold  of  the  two  bottom 
corners  and  doubling  them  upwards  from  you  and  then  of  the  top  corners 
and  doubling  them  downwards  towards  you.  Turn  now  at  right  angles  to 
its  former  position  so  as  to  have  open  ends  pointing  towards  you.  Press 
these  quickly  together  with  the  roller  to  inclose  some  air,  and  press  paste 
across  also  in  two  or  three  places,  making  little  ridges,  thus  preventing  air 
which  has  been  shut  in,  from  forming  into  large  bubble.  Roll  out  again, 
and  repeat  till  remaining  two  parts  of  Crisco  have  thus  been  used.  At 
the  last  rolling,  bring  to  required  thickness;  and  if  it  needs  widening  as 
well  as  lengthening,  turn  it  at  right  angles  to  its  former  position,  and  roll 
straight  across  it  as  before,  a  rule  which,  with  flaky  pastry,  should  always 
be  observed,  since,  unlike  the  short  pastries,  its  lightness  suff^ers  if  rolled 
obliquely  to  the  direction  in  which  it  has  been  folded. 

Sufficient  for  two  small  pies. 

Puff  Pastry 

1  teaspoonful  salt  1  yolk  of  egg 

1  cupful  Crisco  2  teaspoonfuls  lemon  juice 

2  cupfuls  flour  Cold  water 

Measure  Crisco  and  set  in  cold  place  to  chill  it.  Sift  flour  and  salt  into 
basin,  and  add  lemon  juice.  Take  a  quarter  of  the  Crisco,  and  rub  it 
lightly  into  flour  with  finger  tips  until  there  are  no  lumps  left.  Beat  yolk 
of  egg  and  add  a  little  cold  water,  then  add  them  to  the  flour,  making  them 
into  a  stiffish  dough.  Turn  this  on  to  floured  board,  and  work  well  with 
hands  until  it  will  no  longer  stick  to  fingers  and  forms  a  perfectly  smooth 
dough.  Form  into  oblong  piece  and  roll  out  to  about  half  inch  thickness. 
The  Crisco  to  be  used  should  be  as  nearly  as  possible  of  same  consistency 
as  the  paste. 

Form  it  into  neat  flat  cake,  and  place  in  center  of  pastry.  Fold  up 
rather  loosely,  and  flat  the  folds  with  rolling-pin.  Place  in  refrigerator  for 
ten  minutes.     Then  roll  out  pastry  into  long  narrow  strip,  being  careful 

92 


Pastries 

that  Crisco  does  not  get  through.  Fold  exactly  in  three,  press  down  folds, 
and  lay  aside  in  cool  place  or  in  refrigerator  fifteen  minutes.  This  is  called 
giving  the  pastry  one  "turn"  and  seven  of  these  is  the  number  required 
for  this  pastry.  The  next  time  the  pastry  is  rolled,  place  it  with  the  joins 
at  your  right  hand  side,  and  open  ends  towards  you.  Give  two  "turns" 
this  time,  and  again  set  aside  in  cool  place  for  at  least  fifteen  minutes. 
Repeat  this  until  pastry  has  had  seven  rolls  in  all.  The  object  of  the 
cooling  between  the  rolls  is  to  keep  Crisco  and  flour  in  distinct  and  sep- 
arate layers,  in  which  it  is  the  function  of  the  rolling-pin  and  folding  to 
arrange  them,  and  on  which  the  lightness  of  the  pastry  depends. 

When  rolling,  keep  the  pressure  of  the  two  hands  as  equal  as  possible. 
If  the  pastry  becomes  rounded,  it  shows  that  there  is  more  pressure  being 
done  on  the  rounded  side  than  the  other.  After  it  has  received  its  last  roll, 
it  is  better  to  be  laid  aside  before  using,  then  rolled  to  the  thickness  re- 
quired. 

Sufficient  for  two  pies. 

Rough  Puff  Pastry 

2  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  lemon  juice 

yi  cupful  Crisco, generous  measure        1  egg 
}4  teaspoonful  salt  Cold  water 

Have  Crisco  cold  and  firm.  Sift  flour  and  salt  into  basin,  add  Crisco 
and  cut  into  pieces  one  inch  square.  Beat  up  egg,  add  lemon  juice  and  a 
very  little  cold  water,  then  add  them  gradually  into  other  ingredients 
making  them  into  a  stiff  paste.  Roll  in  a  long  piece  on  floured  board, 
fold  in  three,  turn  rough  edges  toward  you  and  roll  out  again,  continuing 
this  for  five  times.  Place  in  refrigerator  or  in  cool  place  ten  nfinutes  be- 
tween each  rolling.  This  pastry  may  be  used  at  once  for  all  kinds  of  sweet 
or  savory  pies,  but  it  is  improved  by  standing  for  a  few  hours  in  a  cool 
place.     Bake  in  hot  oven.      Sufficient  for  two  covered  pies. 

Dominion  Paste 

5  cupfuls  flour  2  eggs 

\yi  cupfuls  Crisco  2  yolks  of  eggs 

y^  cupful  ground  almonds  15^  teaspoonfuls  salt 

1  cupful  sugar  Water 

Sift  flour  and  almonds  into  basin,  rub  Crisco  into  them,  add  salt, 
sugar,  eggs  well  beaten  and  water  to  make  stifle  paste.    Leave  in  cool  place 
two  hours,  then  roll  out  and  use  for  pies  and  tartlets. 
Sufficient  for  four  pies. 

Hot  Water  Paste 

1  cupful  flour  ^  teaspoonful  salt 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  }4  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

3  tablespoonfuls  boiling  water 
Sift  flour,  salt  and  baking  powder  into  basin,  rub  Crisco  lightly  into 
them,  then  stir  in  boiling  water.     Cool  paste  before  using,  or  it  will  be  too 
sticky  to  handle. 

Sufficient  for  one  pie. 

93 


Pastries 


Butterscotch  Pie 


1  egg  3  tablespoonfuls  water 

1  cupful  dark  brown  sugar  %  teaspoonful  salt 

1  cupful  milk  1  tablespoonful  powdered  sugar 

3  tablespoonfuls  flour  1  baked  crust 

>^^v^      2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

.,  ^    Put  yolk  of  egg  into  saucepan,  add  brown  sugar,  flour,  milk,  water, 
Crisco,  salt,  and  vanilla.    Stir  over  fire  until  it  thickens  and  comes  to  boil- 
.ing  point.     Pour  into  baked  pie  shell.     Beat  up  white  of  egg,  then  beat 
powdered  sugar  into  it.    Spread  on  top  of  pie  and  brown  lightly  in  oven. 
Sufiicient  for  one  pie. 

Rhubarb  Custard  Pie 

1  cupful  cut  rhubarb  2  eggs 

1  cupful  sugar  }4  teaspoonful  ginger  extract 

1  tablespoonful  flour  1  cupful  milk 

1  tablespoonful  melted  Criscc^  Crisco  pastry 

Cut  rhubarb  in  small  pieces  and  mix  with  sugar  and  flour.  Beat  egg 
yolks,  add  milk,  ginger  extract,  and  melted  Crisco.  Line  pie  plate  with 
pastry,  and  fill  with  rhubarb  mixture.  Pour  custard  over  and  bake  in 
moderate  oven  until  firm.  Cover  with  meringue  made  with  stiffly  beaten 
whites  of  eggs  to  which  two  tablespoonfuls  powdered  sugar  have  been 
added. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  pie. 

«k  Sugar  Paste  for  Tartlets 

1  cupful  siigar  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

4  cupfuls  flour  3  eggs 
j4  cupful  Crisco,  generous  measure  1  lemon 

Sift  flour  on  to  baking  board,  make  hole  in  center,  and  put  in  grated 
lemon  rind,  salt,  SJigar,  eggs,  and  Crisco.  Mix  the  whole  to  a  stiflF  pastry. 
This  paste  is  used  for  the  bottom  layer  of  pies  and  to  line  tartlet  tins  of 
various  kinds.   It, is  excellent  for  turnovers.     Sufficient  for  thirty  tartlets. 

*"  Currant  Tartlets 

yi  cupful  currants  2  tablespoonfuls  chopped 

3  tablespoonfuls  ground  rice  candied  orange  peel 

2  whites  of  eggs  |^  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Pinch  of  salt 
yi  cupful  sponge  cake  crumbs              Crisco  pastry 

4  tablespoonfuls  sugar  1  tablespoonful  cream 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  ground  rice,  crumbs,  peel, 
currants,  cream,  salt,  lemon  extract,  and  whites  of  eggs  well  beaten.  Roll 
out  paste,  cut  into  rounds,  line  some  Criscoed  tartlet  tins  with  rounds, 
put  in  each  a  tablespoonful  of  the  mixture.  Bake  tartlets  in  moderate 
oven  from  twelve  to  fifteen  minutes.  Or,  these  tartlets  may  be  covered  with 
frosting,  and  a  little  chopped  cocoanut  sprinkled  over  tops. 

Sufficient  for  nine  tartlets. 

94 


Pastriej 

Bartemian  Tarts 

1  cupful  sugar  1  egg 

1  lemon  1  cupful  raisins 

yi  lb.  chopped  candied  citron  1  tablespoonful  melted 

peel  Crisco 

Crisco  flake  pastry  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

Roll  pastry  thin  and  cut  out  large  cakes  of  it.  Beat  egg,  add  sugar, 
Crisco,  rind  and  strained  juice  of  lemon,  salt,  citron,  and  raisins.  Mix  and 
put  tablespoonful  of  mixture  on  each  of  pastry  cakes,  wet  edges  of  paste 
and  fold  like  old  fashioned  turn  o.ver.  Do  not  stick  with  fork  or  juice  will 
run  out.  Lay  turn  overs  on  Criscoed  tins  and  bike  in  hot  oven  from  twelve 
to  fifteen  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  twelve  tarts. 

Apricot  Tarts 

2  cupfuls  flour  2  teaspoonfuls  vanilla  extract 
5^  cupful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

4  tablespoonfuls  sugar  Apricot  jam  or  jelly 

yi  teaspoonful  salt  ^^        Whipped  cream 

1  egg  Angelica 

Preserved  cherries 

Rub  Crisco  into  flour,  add  salt,  sugar,  baking  powder,  break  egg  in 
and  mix  well  with  fork,  then  add  vanilla.  Roll  out,  cut  with  cutter  and 
line  Criscoed  tartlet  tins  with  the  rounc^s.  Line  with  paper  and  put  in 
some  rice  or  peas  to  keep  paste  from  ri'-ing;  bake  in  hot  oven  twenty  min- 
utes. Remove  rice  and  paj.  ^s.  When  pastries  are  cold  put  in  each  one  a 
spoonful  of  the  jam  or  jelly.  Fill  with  whipped  cream  and  decorate  with 
cherries  and  angelica.  ^, 

Sufficient  for  thirty  tarts. 

Bakewell  Tartlets 

4  tablespoonfuls  sugar  J^  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

2  eggs  X  teaspoonful  salt 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  }4  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

1  cupful  flour  Preserves  *■ 

Pastry 
Cream  Crisco  and  sugar,  then  add  eggs  well  beaten,  flour,  salt,  baking 
powder,  and  extract.     Line  twelve  tartlet  tins  with  pastry,  put  teaspoon- 
ful of  preserves  in  each,  then  divide  mixture  into  them,  and  bake  in  moder- 
ately  hot   oven  twenty   minutes. 
Sufficient  for  twelve  tartlets. 


95 


AP  J  ^€ 


IHE  usual  method  of  making  bread  is  to  fer- 
ment dough  with  yeast;  the  latter  acts  upon 
certain  constituents  in  the  flour  ultimately 
producing  a  gas  which  permeates  the  dough. 
The  dough  is  placed  in  a  very  hot  oven,  the  heat  kills  the 
yeast  plant,  the  gas  expands  with  the  heat,  still  raising  the 
dough.  The  loaf  is  set  in  shape,  and,  when  finally  cooked 
and  the  gas  all  escaped,  will  be  found  to  be  light  and  full  of 
tiny  holes.  Certain  factors  hasten  or  delay  these  changes. 
A  moist,  warm  medium  being  most  favorable  to  the  growth 
of  the  yeast,  the  water  should  just  be  lukewarm;  then  a 
good  flour,  containing  about  8  per  cent  of  gluten  is  neces- 
sary. This  gluten  is  the  proteid  in  flour;  when  well 
mixed  with  water  it  forms  a  viscid  elastic  substance,  hence 
it  is  necessary  to  well  knead  dough  to  make  it  more  springy, 
so  that  when  the  gas  is  generated  in  it,  it  will  expand  and  take 
the  form  of  a  sponge,  and  thus  prevent  the  gas  from  escaping. 
The  bread  must  be  put  into  a  very  hot  oven  at  first,  340°  F., 
so  that  the  yeast  plant  is  killed  quickly.  If  this  be  not  ac- 
complished soon,  the  loaf  may  go  on  spreading  in  the  oven, 
and,  if  not  sour  in  taste,  will  not  be  of  such  a  good  flavor. 

Plenty  of  salt  in  dough  is  said  to  strengthen  the  gluten, 
give  a  good  flavor  to  the  bread,  and  keep  it  moist  for  a  longer 
time,  but  it  rather  retards  the  working  of  the  yeast.  Flour  also 
may  be  made  into  a  light  loaf  by  using  baking  powder  to  pro- 
duce the  gas.  This  is  a  much  quicker  process,  but  the  bread 
is  not  liked  so  universally  as  when  made  with  yeast.  For,  when 
yeast  is  used,  other  changes  take  place  in  the  dough  besides  the 
production  of  the  gas,  that  seem  to  give  bread  the  character- 
istic flavor  constantly  welcome  by  the  palate.  Good  flour 
has  a  slight  pure  smell,  free  from  any  moldy  odor. 

Yeast  is  a  fungoid  growth,  a  microscropic  plant  capable 
of  starting  a  fermentation  in  various  substances.     It  grows 


Breads,  etc. 

rapidly  in  a  favorable  medium,  as  when  mixed  with  flour 
and  water,  and  kept  in  a  warm  place,  resulting  in  setting  up 
fermentation.  Baking  powders  are  composed  of  an  acid  and 
an  alkali.  Some  kind  of  flour  usually  is  added  to  keep  them 
dry  and  free  from  lumps.  When  the  mixture  containing  the 
baking  powder  is  moistened  the  acid  and  the  alkali  chemically 
combine  and  alter,  a  gas  being  generated.  If  the  articles,  be 
placed  soon  in  great  heat,  the  gas  is  warmed,  expands,  and 
in  its  endeavor  to  escape  raises  the  mass.  The  heat  sets 
the  mixture  in  this  raised  condition,  thus  the  cake  or  pudding 
is  rendered  light,  easier  to  masticate  and  digest. 

Baking  powders  are  used  for  two  reasons.  First.  To  sup- 
ply a  gas  to  take  the  place  of  ingredients,  as  when  used  in 
making  bread,  buns,  etc.  If  flour,  salt  and  water  were  mixed 
and  baked  in  a  large  loaf,  it  would  be  a  hard,  indigestible 
mass.  If  baking  powder  be  mixed  in  with  similar  ingredients 
and  baked,  the  result  would  be  a  light  loaf,  easy  to  masti- 
cate and  digest. 

Second.  It  is  used  to  save  labor.  When  a  richer  mixture 
be  made  it  requires  to  be  well  beaten  to  mix  in  air.  Baking 
powder  often  is  added  to  save  some  of  the  otherwise  neces- 
sary beating. 

Baking  Powder  Biscuits 

2  cupfuls  flour  *2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  salt 

Milk 

Mix  and  sift  twice  dry  ingredients.  Work  in  Crisco  with  finger  tips, 
add  gradually  milk,  mixing  with  knife  to  soft  dough.  Toss  on  floured  board; 
pat  and  roll  to  one-half  inch  thickness.  Shape  with  biscuit  cutter.  Place 
on  Criscoed  tin  and  bake  in  hot  oven  twelve  minutes.  To  have  good  bis- 
cuits dough  should  be  handled  as  little  as  possible,  just  enough  to  get  in 
shape  to  cut.  Milk  or  water  used  for  mixing  should  be  very  cold,  and 
biscuits  should  be  gotten  into  oven  at  once  after  adding  liquid  to  flour. 
If  top  of  each  biscuit  is  lightly  brushed  over  with  melted  Crisco  before 
baking,  crust  will  be  much  nicer.     SuSicient  for  fifteen  biscuits. 

•Amount  of  bakine  powder  may  be  increased  if  especially. raised  biscuits  are  desired.  2  teaspoonfuls, 
bowrrer,  is  most  healthful  amount. 

Best  Jumbles 

2  cupfuls  sugar  3  tablespoonfuls  milk 

1  cupful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  salt 

4  eggs  3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

4  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  almond  extract 

1  teaspoonful  rose  extract 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  thoroughly  together,  then  gradually  add  eggs 
well  beaten,  now  add  milk,  extracts,  flour,  salt  and  baking  powder.     Mix 

97 


Breads,  etc. 

and  roll  out  lightly  on  floured  baking  board;  cut  into  circles  with  dough- 
nut cutter,  lay  on  Criscoed  tins  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  from  seven  to 
ten  minutes  or  till  light  brown.     These  cookies  will  keep  fresh  two  weeks, 
and  if  milk  is  left  out,  a  month. 
Sufficient  for  seventy  jumbles. 

Boston  Brown  Bread 

1  cupful  ryemeal  1  cupful  graham  flour 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  ^  tablespoonful  baking  soda 
1  cupful  sugar  ^  teaspoonful  salt 

1  cupful  cornmeal  ^  cupful  molasses 

If^  cupfuls  sweet  milk 

Mix  and  sift  ingredients.  Dissolve  soda  with  one  tablespoonful  hot 
water,  add  to  molasses,  then  add  milk  and  mix  with  dry  ingredients. 
Turn  into  greased  mold  two-thirds  full,  grease  cover,  and  steam  steadily 
three  and  a  half  hours.    A  6-pound  Crisco  pail  can  be  used  for  a  mold. 

Sufficient  for  one  loaf. 

Bran  Gems 

}4  cupful  bran  14  cupful  milk 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  saltspoonful  salt 

1  tablespoonful  whole  wheat  1  egg 

flour  2  tablespoonfuls  molasses 

yi  cupful  white  flour  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

Mix  Crisco  thoroughly  with  molasses,  add  egg  well  beaten,  milk,  salt, 
bran,  flours,  and  baking  powder.  Divide  into  well  greased  gem  pans,  and 
bake  in  hot  oven  from  eight  to  ten  minutes.  These  gems  are  excellent  for 
constipation. 

Sufficient  for  eight  gems. 

Brown  Nut  Bread 

4  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco     \}4  cupfuls  flour 

2  eggs  IM  cupfuls  graham  flour 
1  cupful  sugar  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

1  cupful  sour  milk  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

^  cupful  New  Orleans  molasses       1  cupful  sultana  raisins 
1  cupful  chopped  nut  meats 
Beat  eggs  and  sugar  together  for  five  minutes,  then  add  molasses, 
soda  mixed  with  milk,  salt,  flours,  raisins,  and  nuts.     Mix  and  turn  into 
Criscoed  and  floured  cake  tin  and  bake  in  slow  oven  one  and  a  quarter 
hours. 

Sufficient  for  one  medium-sized  loaf. 

Buttermilk  Biscuits 

1  quart  flour  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 
1  tablespoonful  sugar  1  egg 

1  teaspoonful  salt  ^  pint  buttermilk 

Sift  flour,  baking  powder,  salt,  and  sugar  together,  then  rub  in  Crisco 
with  finger  tips,  add  egg  well  beaten,  and  soda  mixed  with  milL     Dough 

98 


Breads,  etc. 

should  be  soft  and  little  more  milk  can  be  added  if  needed.     Roll  out  lightly 
and  handle  as  little  as  possible.     Cut  with  biscuit  cutter,  lay  on  Criscoed 
tins  and  bake  in  hot  oven  ten  minutes. 
Sufficient  for  thirty  biscuits. 

Chocolate  Brownies 

1  cupful  sugar  yi  cupful  flour 

6  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         1  cupful  chopped  English 

2  eggs  walnut  meats 

2  squares  chocolate  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

y^  teaspoonful  salt  3  tablespoonfuls  boiling  water 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  eggs  well  beaten,  chocolate 
dissolved  in  boiling  water,  salt,  flour,  vanilla,  and  nuts.  Divide  and  spread 
thin  in  2  Criscoed  square  pans  and  bake  in  slow  oven  from  twenty  to 
twenty-five  minutes.  Cut  in  strips  and  serve  with  ice  cream.  These  are 
a  cross  between  cookies  and  heavy  cake. 
Sufficient  for  fifty  brownies. 

Chocolate  Wafers 

1  cupful  sugar  2  eggs 

5  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  yi  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

2  cupfuls  flour  yi  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 
yi  cake  chocolate  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  chocolate  melted,  eggs  well 
beaten,  vanilla  extract,  flour,  salt,  and  soda.  Mix  and  turn  out  on  to 
floured  baking  board.  Roll  out  thin,  and  cut  with  small  cutter.  Lay  on 
Criscoed  tin  and  bake  from  seven  to  ten  minutes  in  moderate  oven. 

Sufficient  for  forty-six  wafers. 

Citron  Buns 

1  yeast  cake  1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

6  tablespoonfuls  sugar  1  cupful  scalded  milk 
%  cupful  Crisco  1  egg 

yi  cupful  raisins  S}4  cupfuls  flour 

y^  cupful  chopped  citron  peel  yi  cupful  lukewarm  water 

1  teaspoonful  salt 
Scald  milk,  add  half  of  sugar  and  salt;  when  lukewarm  add  yeast 
dissolved  in  water  and  1^  cupfuls  flour.  Mix,  cover,  and  let  rise  till 
light;  then  add  Crisco,  remainder  of  sugar  and  flour,  raisins,  peel,  and 
extract.  Knead  lightly,  cover,  and  let  rise.  Divide  into  small  pieces, 
let  rise  on  greased  tins,  brush  over  with  beaten  egg  and  bake  in  hot  oven 
twenty  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  twenty-two  buns. 

Cofiee  Bread 

5^4  cupful  milk  1  cupful  sugar 

yi  cupful  melted  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

yi  cake  compressed  yeast  ^  cupful  chopped  English 

1  teaspoonful  salt  walnut  meats 

2  eggs  Flour 

Heat  milk  slightly,  then  add  flour  to  make  batter  and  yeast  dissolved 
in  little  lukewarm  water.     Allow  to  rise  until  light,  then  add  Crisco,  eggs 

99 


Breads,  etc, 

well  beaten,  sugar,  lemon,  salt,  and  enough  flour  to  make  stiff  dough. 
Knead  ten  minutes  and  let  rise  until  light.     Place  in  Criscoed  pan  and  let 
rise  again.     Spread  with  melted  Crisco  and  sprinkle  with  sugar,  cinnamon 
and  nuts.     Bake  in  hot  oven  half  an  hour. 
Sufficient  for  one  large  loaf. 

Columbia  Muffins 

3  tablespoonfuls  sugar  \J4  cupfuls  milk 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  salt 

1  egg  3>^  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

3)4  cupfuls  sifted  flour 

Sift  flour,  salt,  and  baking  powder  together.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar, 
add  egg  well  beaten,  then  milk  and  flour  mixture.  Divide  into  Criscoed 
and  floured  gem  pans  and  bake  twenty-five  minutes  in  hot  oven. 

Sufficient  for  twenty  muffins. 

Corn  Bread 

1  cupful  cornmeal  1  cupful  sour  cream 

2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         2  eggs 

1  cupful  flour  yi  teaspoonful  baking  soda 
}4  cupful  sugar                                   ^  teaspoonful  salt 

Mix  cornmeal  with  flour,  sugar,  salt,  Crisco,  eggs  well  beaten,  and 
soda  mixed  with  cream.  Mix  well  and  turn  into  Criscoed  tin  and  bake 
in  moderate  oven  thirty  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  pan  of  corn  bread. 

Cornmeal  Rolls 

1)4  cupfuls  flour  1  tablespoonful  sugar 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  K  teaspoonfulsalt 

1  egg  ^  cupful  cornmeal 

}4  cupful  milk  4  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

Sift  together  flour,  cornmeal,  salt,  baking  powder,  and  sugar.  Rub 
in  Crisco  with  finger  tips,  then  add  egg  well  beaten  and  milk.  Roll  out, 
cut  into  rounds  with  a  large  cutter,  brush  over  with  melted  Crisco,  fold 
over  as  for  Parkerhouse  rolls,  brush  tops  with  beaten  egg  or  milk  and  bake 
in  hot  oven  ten  minutes. 

Sufficient'for  fifteen  rolls. 

Cream  Scones 

2  cupfuls  flour  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  2  eggs 

3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder       ^  cupful  cream 
2  teaspoonfuls  sugar  1  white  of  egg 

Mix  and  sift  floor,  salt,  sugar,  and  baking  powder.  Rub  in  Crisco  with 
finger  tips,  add  eggs  well  beaten  and  cream.  Knead  dough  lightly  on  floured 
baking  board,  divide  into  four  equal  pieces,  make  smooth  and  roll  out, 

100 


Breads,  etc. 

and  cut  into  4  small  scones.  Lay  them  on  hot  griddle,  brush  over  with 
beaten  white  of  egg  and  fry  slowly  on  both  sides.  The  dough  should 
always  be  lightly  handled. 

Sufficient  for  sixteen  scones. 

Crisco  Brownies 

y^  cupful  sugar  1  cupful  flour 

^  cupful  Crisco  1  cupful  chopped  nut  meats 

y^  cupful  molasses  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

2  eggs  y^  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  eggs  well  beaten,  molasses, 
extract,  flour,  salt  and  nuts.  Divide  into  small  fancy  Criscoed  tins,  or 
bake  in  Criscoed  sheet  tin  and  cut  in  squares.  Bake  in  moderate  oven  half 
hour.    These  are  a  cross  between  cake  and  candy. 

Sufficient  for  twelve  squares. 

Crisco  Batter  Cakes 

3  eggs  1  cupful  buttermilk 

}4  cupful  melted  Crisco  }4  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

1  cupful  flour  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

,  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

Beat  up  yolks  of  eggs,  add  milk,  Crisco,  and  flour  mixed  with  salt, 
soda,  and  baking  powder  and  beat  till  smooth.  Fold  in  whites  beaten  to  a 
stiflF  froth.  Drop  in  large  spoonfuls  on  ungreased  skillet  or  griddle.  Serve 
hot  with  butter  or  maple  syrup.  - 

Sufficient  for  fifteen  cakes. 

Crisco  Milk  Bread 

3  tahlespoonfuls  sugar  1  yeast  cake 

3  tahlespoonfuls  melted  Crisco        I  quart  milk 

2  tahlespoonfuls  salt  About  7  pints  flour 

Mix  yeast  cake  with  1  tablespoonful  sugar.  Heat  milk,  add  remainder 
of  sugar,  Crisco,  and  salt.  Cool  and  add  yeast  and  flour  to  make  stiff" 
dough.  Turn  out  on  floured  baking  board,  cut  in  three  pieces,  knead  first 
one  piece,  then  others,  stretching  dough;  let  rise  over  night  or  in  warm 
temperature  five  hours.  Knead  lightly  and  divide  into  Criscoed  pans. 
Allow  to  rise  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  one  hour.  From  same  dough, 
French  bread,  breadsticks,  horse  shoe  rolls  and  French  rolls  can  be  made. 

Sufficient  for  three  loaves. 

Dessert  Biscuits 

1  cupful  confectioners'  sugar  5  whites  of  eggs 

1  cupful  Crisco  }4  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

1  cupful  flour  1  teaspoonful  salt 

Cream  Crisco  and  gradually  add  sugar,  mix  thoroughly,  and  incor- 
porate, one  by  one,  whites  of  eggs.  Now  add  flour,  salt,  and  vanilla. 
Mix  well,  then  place  in  small,  long  heaps  on  a  Criscoed  tin.  Bake  in  cool 
oven  to  pale  brown   color. 

Sufficient  for  sixty  biscuits. 

101 


Breads,  etc. 


Entire  Wheat  Bread 


\yi  cupfuls  boiling  water  2  tablespoonfuls  sugar 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  yeast  cake 

\yi  cupfuls  milk        •  %  cupful  tepid  water 

2  teaspoonfuls  salt  Whole  wheat  flour 

Mix  boiling  water,  milk,  sugar,  salt,  and  Crisco  together.  Add  yeast 
cake  dissolved  in  tepid  water,  with  3}4  cupfuls  whole  wheat  flour.  Mix 
and  let  stand  until  light.  Add  more  flour  until  soft  dough  is  formed, 
then  knead  and  divide  into  two  loaves.  Place  in  Criscoed  tins  and  let 
stand  until  the  dough  doubles  its  bulk.  Brush  over  with  milk  and  bake  in 
moderate  oven  one  and  a  half  hours. 

Sufficient  for  two  small  loaves. 

Excellent  Graham  Bread 

2  cupfuls  graham  flour  1>2  cupfuls  sour  milk 

4  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  %  cupful  sugar 

K  cupful  flour  }i  teaspoonful  salt 

1  teaspoonful  baking  powder  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

Sift  flours  with  baking  powder,  salt,  sugar,  and  soda,  then  add  Crisco 
and  milk.  Mix  and  turn  into  greased  and  floured  cake  tin  and  bake  in 
moderate  oven  fifty  minutes.  « 

Sufficient  for  one  small  loaf. 

Filled  Cookies 

1  egg  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

1  cupful  sugar  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

y2  cupful  Crisco  3y2  cupfuls  flour 

yi  cupful  milk  or  cream  ]4  teaspoonful  salt 
1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

For  Filling 

1  cupful  chopped  raisins  yi  cupful  sugar 

1  tablespoonful  flour  }4  cupful  water 

yi  cupful  chopped  walnut  meats 

For  cookies.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar,  add  salt,  egg  well  beaten,  milk, 
vanilla,  and  flour  sifted  with  baking  powder'  and  soda.  Mix  and  turn 
out  on  floured  baking  board.  Dough  should  be  soft.  Roll  very  thin  and 
cut  out  with  cooky  cutter.  Spread  one-half  of  cookies  with  filling, then 
place  remaining  cookies  on  top  and  press  edges  together.  Place  on  Criscoed 
tins  and  bake  in  moderately  hot  oven  fifteen  minutes. 

For  filling.  Mix  sugar  and  flour  in  saucepan,  add  raisins,  nuts,  and 
water,  stir  and  cook  until  thick.    Cool  before  using. 

Fried  Cornmeal  Nut  Cakes 

2  cupfuls  yellow  cornmeal  1  teaspoonful  salt 

2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         1  egg 

3  cupfuls  boiling  water  )^  cupful  chopped  nut  meats 

Bring  water  and  salt  to  boil,  stir  in  cornmeal,  add  nut  meats,  and  stir 
and  cook  ten  minutes.     Remove  from  fire  and  add  egg  well  beaten,  and 

102 


Breads,  etc. 

melted  Crisco.     Turn  into  Criscoed  tin  and  cool.     When  cold,  slice  and 
fry  in  hot  Crisco.     Serve  with  honey  or  maple  syrup. 
Sufficient  for  six  or  eight  slices. 

Fried  Cakes  with  Apple  Sauce 

1  cupful  sugar  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

3  cupfuls  sour  milk  ^  teaspoonful  salt 
^  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg  Flour 

1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract  Apple  sauce 

Cream  Crisco,  gradually  add  sugar,  then  add  salt,  nutmeg,  lemon, 
soda,  baking  powder,  sour  milk  and  sufficient  flour  to  make  stiffish  dough. 
Roll  out  on  floured  baking  board,  cut  with  large  round  cutter,  and  fry  in 
hot  Crisco  until  well  cooked  and  nicely  browned  on  both  sides.  Drain  and 
serve  with  hot  apple  sauce. 

Sufficient  for  twenty  cakes. 

Fruit  Cookies 

1  teaspoonful  salt  1  teaspoonful  powdered 

2  cupfuls  brown  sugar  cinnamon 

1  cupful  Crisco  yi  teaspoonful  powdered  allspice 

1  cupful  chopped  raisins  1  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger 

1  cupful  chopped  English  l}4  teaspoonfuls  baking  soda 

walnut  meats  2  tablespoonfuls  sour  milk 

3  eggs  Flour 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  salt,  eggs  well  beaten,  soda 
mixed  with  milk,  spices,  raisins,  nuts,  and  enough  flour  to  make  stifi"  dough. 
About  5  cupfuls  flour  will  be  sufficient.  Roll  out,  cut  with  cooky  cutter, 
lay  on  Criscoed  tins  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  from  ten  to  twelve  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  sixty  cookies. 

Fruit  Drop  Cakes 

1  cupful  sugar  4  tablespoonfuls  chopped  nut 
yi  cupful  Crisco  meats 

2  cupfuls  flour  2  tablespoonfuls  chopped  candied 
2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  citron  peel 

1  teaspoonful  salt  3  eggs 

4  tablespoonfuls  currants  ^  cupful  milk 

1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  yolks  of  eggs  well  beaten. 
Beat  whites  stiffly  and  add  alternately  with  milk.  Add  sifted  flour,  baking 
powder  and  salt,  then  fruits,  nuts  and  extract.  Divide  mixture  into 
Criscoed  and  floured  gem  pans,  and  bake  twenty  minutes  in  moderate  oven. 

Sufficient  for  eighteen  drop  cakes. 

103 


Breads,  etc. 

Fruit  Rolls 

1  cupful  milk  yi  lb.  chopped  candied  citron  ped 

1  yeast  cake  )4  cupful  chopped  English 
}4  cupful  lukewarm  water  walnut  meats 

}4  cupful  sugar  ^  cupful  currants 

X  cupful  melted  Crisco  }4  cupful  sultana  raisins 

2  teaspoonfuls  salt  }4  teaspoonful  powdered  cinnamon 
2  eggs  ^2  teaspoonful  powdered  mace 

}4  cupful  chopped  cocoanut  Flour 

Scald  milk,  when  lukewarm  add  yeast  cake  dissolved  in  tepid  water 
and  lyi  cupfuls  flour,  beat  well,  cover  and  let  rise  till  light.  Add  sugar, 
salt,  eggs  well  beaten,  Crisco  and  enough  flour  to  knead;  knead,  let  rise 
again.  Roll  out  one-eighth  inch  thick,  spread  with  melted  Crisco,  sprinkle 
with  sugar,  cinnamon  and  mace,  fruit  and  nuts;  roll  like  jelly  roll  and  cut 
in  one  inch  pieces.  Place  pieces  in  Criscoed  pan,  let  rise,  brush  over  with 
melted  Crisco,  and  bake  in  hot  oven  twenty  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  sixteen  rolls. 

Ginger  Snaps 

2  cupfuls  molasses  2  teaspoonfuls  powdered  ginger 

1  cupful  brown  sugar  1  teaspoonful  powdered  mace 

1  cupful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  salt 

2  teaspoonfuls  baking  soda  2  tablespoonfuls  boiling  water 

Flour 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  molasses,  spices,  salt,  soda 
mixed  with  boiling  water  and  sufficient  flour  to  make  stiff  paste.  Roll 
out  thin,  cut  with  small  cutter,  lay  on  Criscoed  tins  and  bake  in  hot  oven 
from  five  to  seven  minutes. 

Sufficient  fur  one  hundred  snaps. 

Ginger  Gems 

1  cupful  sugar  2  eggs 

yi  cupful  Crisco  1  cupful  milk 

yi  cupful  chopped  preserved  3  cupfuls  flour 

ginger  3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

yi  teaspoonful  salt 
Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  then  add  eggs  well  beaten.     Sift 
flour,  baking  powder,  and  salt  together  and  add  alternately  with  milk  to 
first  mixture.     Now  mix  in  ginger  and  divide  mixture  into  Criscoed  and 
floured  gem  pans  and  bake  in  hot  oven  twenty-five  minutes. 
Sufficient  for  sixteen  gems. 

Gluten  Bread 

2  cupfuls  scalded  milk  2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 
2  cupfuls  boiling  water                    yi  cupful  warm  water 

2  teaspoonfuls  salt  y^  yeast  cake 

1  egg  3  cupfuls  gluten  flour 

Mix  Crisco,  boiling  water,  milk,  and  salt.  When  lukewarm,  add 
yeast  cake  dissolved  in  warm  water,  egg  well  beaten,  and  gluten.    Let  rise, 

104 


Breads,  etc. 

when  risen  and  spongy  beat  well,  add  enough  gluten  to  make  a  stiflF  dough 
and  knead  well.     Allow  to  rise,  shape  in  loaves,  place  in  Criscoed  bread 
pans,  let  rise,  and  bake  for  one  hour  in  moderately  hot  oven. 
Sufficient  for  two  small  loaves. 

Golden  Corn  Muffins 

1  cupful  flour  1  cupful  milk 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  2  eggs 

1  cupful  yellow  cornmeal  1  teaspoonful  salt 

3  tablespoonfuls  sugar  3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  thoroughly  together,  add  eggs  well  beaten 
and  milk.  Then  stir  in  slowly  dry  ingredients  which  have  been  sifted  to- 
gether three  times.  Divide  into  greased  gem  pans  and  bake  in  moderately 
hot  oven  twenty-five  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  twelve  muffins. 

Hominy  Bread  for  Breakfast 

3  cupfuls  cooked  hominy  2  eggs 

2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  salt 

IK  cupfuls  cornmeal  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

2  cupfuls  milk 

Beat  eggs,  add  milk  and  hominy.  Sift  in  cornmeal,  add  baking  pow- 
der and  salt;  add  Crisco.  Beat  all  together  three  minutes.  Pour  into 
deep  Criscoed  pan  and  bake  one  hour  in  slow  oven.     Serve  hot. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  loaf. 

Health  Bread 

2  cupfuls  flour  1  egg 

3  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         2  cupfuls  milk 

2  cupfuls  whole  wheat  flour  1  cupful  molasses 

2  cupfuls  bran  1  cupful  stoned  chopped  dates 
1  teaspoonful  salt                               2  teaspoonfuls  baking  soda 

}4  cupful  sugar  }/2  cupful  hot  water 

Mix  flours  and  bran  together,  add  Crisco,  salt,  sugar,  egg  well  beaten, 
milk,  molasses,  soda  dissolved  in  boiling  water,  and  dates.  Mix  well  to- 
gether and  turn  into  two  Criscoed  and  floured  tins  and  bake  in  moderate 
oven  one  and  a  quarter  hours.    This  bread  is  excellent  for  constipation. 

Sufficient  for  two  loaves. 

Honey  Doughnuts 

3  eggs  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

}4  cupful  sugar  1  teaspoonful  cream  of  tartar 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

1>^  cupfuls  honey  SK  cupfuls  flour 
1  cupful  sour  milk  1  teaspoonful  salt 

Cream  Crisco,  honey  and  sugar  well  together,  then  add  eggs  well 
beaten,  mix  well,  add  milk,  lemon  extract,  flour,  salt,  soda,  and  cream  of 

105 


Breads,  etc. 

tartar.   Mix  and  turn  out  on  baking  board,  roll  out  and  cut  with  doughnut 
cutter.     Fry  in  plenty  of  hot  Crisco.     If  a  piece  of  bread   browns  in  hot 
Crisco  in  sixty  seconds,  teihperature  is  right  for  doughnuts  and  fritters. 
Sufficient  for  sixty-five  doughnuts. 

Hot  Gross  Buns 

j4  cupful  sugar  yi  yeast  cake 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Flour 

1  teaspoonful  salt  y^  cupful  chopped  candied  citron 
^  teaspoonful  powdered  peel 

cinnamon  j^  cupful  seeded  raisins 

1  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger        1  cupful  scalded  milk 

1  egg  %  cupful  lukewarm  water 

Add  Crisco,  sugar,  ana  salt  to  milk;  when  lukewarm,  add  yeast  cake 
dissolved  in  water,  spices,  egg  well  beaten,  and  sufficient  flour  to  make  a 
stiff  dough.  Mix  well,  add  raisins  and  peel,  cover,  and  let  rise  over  night. 
In  morning  divide  into  pieces  and  form  into  neat  buns;  place  in  Criscoed 
pan  one  inch  apart,  let  rise,  brush  over  with  milk  or  beaten  egg,  and  bake 
in  moderately  hot  oven  twenty-five  minutes.  Cool,  and  with  ornamental 
frosting  make  a  cross  on  each  bun.  The  cross  may  be  made  by  placing 
strips  of  paste  on  buns  before  they  are  baked. 

Sufficient  for  twenty  buns. 

Imperial  Muffins 

}4  cupful  scalded  milk  \^  yeast  cake 

yi  cupful  sugar  3/^  cupful  lukewarm  water 

yi  cupful  Crisco  If^  cupfuls  flour 
1  teaspoonful  salt  1  cupful  cornmeal 

Add  sugar  and  salt  to  milk;  when  lukewarm  add  yeast  cake  dissolved 
in  y^  cupful  of  the  water,  and  \yi  cupfuls  flour,  cover,  and  let  rise  until 
light,  then  add  Crisco,  cornmeal,  remaining  flour  and  water.  Let  rise 
over  night,  in  morning  fill  Criscoed  muffin  rings,  two-thirds  full;  let  rise 
until  rings  are  full  and  bake  thirty  minutes  in  hot  oven. 

Sufficient  for  twelve  muffins. 


Lemon  Wafers 

2  eggs  5  cents  baker's  ammonia 

2  cupfuls  sugar  5  cents  oil  of  lemon 

2  cupfuls  Crisco  Flour  to  make  stiff  dough 

2  cupfuls  milk  2  teaspoonfuls  salt 

Cover  ammonia  with  milk  and  let  soak  over  night.  Next  morning  add 
sugar,  Crisco,  salt,  eggs  well  beaten,  lemon  and  enough  flour  to  make  a 
stiff  dough.  Roll  very  thin,  cut  in  squares  or  diamonds,  lay  on  Criscoed 
tins  and  bake  from  five  to  seven  minutes  in  hot  oven. 

Sufficient  for  one  hundred  and  eighty-six  wafers. 

106 


Breads,  etc. 


Lunch  Rolls 


1  yeast  cake  2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 
1^  cupfuls  milk                                     4  cupfuls  flour 

2  tablespoonfuls  sugar  1  egg 

1  teaspoonful  salt 

Scald  and  cool  the  milk,  then  add  yeast  and  sugar.  Now  add  Crisco 
and  2  cupfuls  flour.  Beat  thoroughly,  then  add  egg  well  beaten,  remainder 
of  flour  and  salt.  Mix  and  turn  out  on  floured  board  and  knead  lightly  and 
thoroughly,  using  as  little  flour  as  possible.  Place  in  greased  bowl,  cover 
and  set  aside  in  warm  place  to  rise  two  hours.  When  light,  form  into  small 
rounds,  place  one  inch  apart  on  greased  pan.  Allow  to  rise  half  an  hour. 
Brush  over  with  Crisco  and  bake  in  hot  oven  fifteen  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  twenty  rolls. 

Maple  Cookies 

1  egg  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

1  cupful  sugar  3  tablespoonfuls  hot  water 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  ^  teaspoonful  salt 
1  cupful  sour  cream  Flour 

Maple  sugar 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  egg  well  beaten,  mix  well, 
add  cream,  salt,  soda  dissolved  in  water,  and  sufiicient  flour  to  make  of 
right  consistency  to  drop  from  spoon.  Grate  some  maple  sugar  on  each 
cookie  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  eight  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  forty  cookies. 

Maryland  Beaten  Biscuits 

4  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  salt 
14  cupful  Crisco  Milk 

Water 

Mix  and  sift  flour  and  salt.  Cut  Crisco  in  with  knife  or  work  in 
lightly  with  finger  tips.  Mix  a  little  milk  and  water  together,  chill  thor- 
oughly and  add  enough  to  dry  ingredients  to  make  stiflF  dough.  Every- 
thing should  be  as  cold  as  possible.  Beat  with  rolling-pin  until  dough 
blisters.  Roll  to  one-third  inch  in  thickness  and  cut  into  small  biscuits, 
prick  in  center  and  set  in  refrigerator  an  hour  before  baking.  Place  bis- 
cuits on  Criscoed  tins  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  thirty  minutes.  Bis- 
cuits may  be  baked  in  moderate  gas  oven  and  gas  turned  off  when  bis- 
cuits ere  golden  brown.  Allow  biscuits  to  remain  ten  minutes  in  cooling 
oven   to   dry  out. 

Sufficient  for  sixty  small  biscuits,  a  fraction  larger  than  a  dollar. 

Muffins 

1  cupful  scalded  milk  Xyi  teaspoonfuls  salt 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  ^  yeast  cake 
1  cupful  boiling  water  1  egg 

y^  cupful  sugar  4  cupfuls  flour 

Add  Crisco,  salt,  and  half  of  sugar  to  milk  and  water;  when  luke- 
warm add  yeast  mixed  with  remaining  sugar,  egg  well  beaten,  and  flour. 

107 


Breads,  etc. 

Beat  thoroughly,  cover,  and  let  rise  until  light.  Put  greased  muffin  rings 
on  hot  griddle  greased  with  Crisco.  Fill  half  full  with  raised  muffin  mix- 
ture and  cook  slowly  until  well  risen  and  browned  underneath.  Turn 
muffins  and  rings  and  brown  other  side.  When  muffins  are  cold,  split 
open,  toast,  and  serve  with  marmalade. 
Sufficient  for  sixteen  muffins. 

Nut  Doughnuts 

\}i  cupfuls  sugar  1  cupful  chopped  English 

4  tablespoonfuis  Crisco  walnut  meats 

\yi  cupfuls  milk  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

2  eggs  1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 
4  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  14  teaspoonful  salt 

Flour  to  make  soft  dough 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  eggs  well  beaten,  milk,  salt, 
extracts,  baking  powder,  nuts,  and  sufficient  flour  to  make  soft  dough. 
Roll  out,  cut  with  cutter  and  fryin  hot  Crisco  to  a  golden  color.  Drain  and 
sift  with  sugar. 

Sufficient  for  seventy-five  doughnuts. 

Oatmeal  Cookies 

\%  cupfuls  sugar  1  teaspoonful  powdered  cinnamon 

1  cupful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger 

3  cupfuls  rolled  oats  1  cupful  stoned  chopped  dates 

2  eggs  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 
}4  cupful  sour  milk                              2  cupfuls  flour 

1  teaspoonful  salt 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  thoroughly  together,  add  eggs  well-beaten, 
rolled  oats,  dates,  salt,  spices,  soda  dissolved  in  milk,  and  flour.  Mix  and 
drop  from  spoon  on  Criscoed  baking  tins.  Bake  in  moderate  oven  from 
ten  to  twelve  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  forty-five  cookies. 

Oven  Scones 

4  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

5  tablespoonfuis  Crisco  2  teaspoonfuls  cream  of  tartar 
1  tablespoonful  sugar  1  egg 

}/2  teaspoonful  salt  Sweet  milk 

Rub  Crisco  finely  into  flour,  add  sugar,  salt,  soda,  and  cream  of  tar- 
tar. Beat  egg,  put  half  of  it  into  cup,  then  with  one-half  and  some  sweet 
milk  make  other  ingredients  into  soft  dough.  Knead  very  little  on  floured 
baking  board,  divide  into  five  pieces,  make  them  smooth  and  roll  out, 
not  too  thinly,  cut  them  into  four  small  cakes.  Lay  them  on  a  Criscoed 
tin,  brush  over  with  remaining  egg  and  bake  in  hot  oven  ten  minutes.  A 
few  currants  or  raisins  may  be  added  if  liked. 

Sufficient  for  twenty  small  scones. 


108 


'« 


Breads,  etc. 

Raised  Doughnuts 

1  cupful  milk  1  cupful  sugar 

yi  yeast  cake  }i  cupful  Crisco 

%  cupful  lukewarm  water  2  eggs 

\}4  teaspoonfuls  salt  1  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

Flour 

Dissolve  yeast  cake  in  lukewarm  water.  Scald  milk  and  cool,  then 
add  yeast,  half  teaspoonful  of  the  salt  and  flour  to  make  a  drop  batter. 
Set  in  a  cosy  place  to  rise.  Cream  Crisco  with  sugar,  add^ggs  well  beaten, 
remainder  of  salt  and  nutmeg,  add  to  yeast  mixture  with  enough  flour  to 
make  stiff"  dough;  let  rise  again.  When  risen,  make  into  small  balls  and 
place  in  a  Criscoed  pan  to  rise.  When  light  drop  into  plenty  of  hot  Crisco 
and  cook  from  four  to  five  minutes  until  doughnuts  are  done.  Drain  on 
soft  paper  and  dredge  with  powdered  sugar. 

Sufl&cient  for  seventy  doughnuts. 

Raisin  and  Buttermilk  Bread 

4  cupfuls  flour  2  teaspoonfuls  cream  of  tartar 

5  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  3  tablespoonfuls  sugar 
1  teaspoonful  salt  2  eggs 

1  teaspoonful  soda  Buttermilk  to  make  soft  dough 

1  cupful  sultana  raisins 

Sift  flour,  salt,  soda  and  cream  of  tartar  into  basin,  rub  in  Crisco  fine, 
add  sugar,  raisins,  eggs  well  beaten,  and  sufiicient  buttermilk  to  make 
soft  dough.  Make  into  smooth  mound,  roll  out,  divide  into  four  pieces, 
lay  on  greased  tin  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  twenty-five  minutes. 

Sufficient  to  make  four  small  loaves. 

Rich  Doughnuts 

1  cupful  sugar  \}4  teaspoonfuls  salt 
5  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  cupful  milk 

3  eggs  1  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

4  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  Flour  to  make  soft  dough 

From  4>^  to  5  cupfuls  flour  sifted  before  measuring.  Cream  Crisco, 
add  sugar  gradually,  and  eggs  well  beaten.  Sift  dry  ingredients  and  add 
alternately  to  egg  mixture.  Roll  out  as  soft  as  can  be  handled.  Cut  with 
cutter  and  fry  in  hot  Crisco.  Heat  Crisco  until  crumb  of  bread  becomes 
golden  brown  in  sixty  seconds. 

Sufficient  for  sixty  doughnuts. 

Rolled  Oats  Bread 

2  cupfuls  boiling  water  2  teaspoonfuls  salt 
2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco                   yi  yeast  cake 

1  cupful  rolled  oats  \4  cupful  lukewarm  water 

yi  cupful  molasses  Flour 

Add  boiling  water  to  oats  and  allow  to  stand  one  hour;  add  molasses, 
salt,  Crisco,  yeast  cake  dissolved  in  lukewarm  water,  and  flour  to  make 

109 


Breads,  etc. 

stiff  dough;  knead  well,  let  rise,  knead  a  very  little,  divide  into  two  Cris- 
coed  bread  pans,  let  rise  again  and  bake  forty  minutes  in  moderate  oven. 
Sufficient  for  two  small  loaves. 

Rose  Leaves 

1  cupful  sugar  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

6  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  rose  extract 

2  eggs  2  cupfuls  flour 

Cream  Crisco,  adding  sugar  gradually,  then  stir  in  eggs  well  beaten; 
add  salt,  extract,  and  flour.  The  dough  should  be  soft.  Now  chill  dough, 
then  roll  very  thin,  using  sugar  instead  of  flour,  to  dust  rolling-pin  and 
board.  Cut  out  with  small  fancy  cutter.  Place  on  tins  greased  with  Crisco 
and  bake  in  moderate  oven  eight  or  ten  minutes  or  until  slightly  browned. 

Sufficient  for  fifty  small  cakes. 

Rye  Muffins 

1  cupful  flour  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         1  egg 

1  cupful  ryemeal  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

2  tablespoonfuls  brown  sugar  1  cupful  milk 

Sift  flour,  meal,  baking  powder,  and  salt  together.     Beat  egg  and 
sugar  together,  then  add  them  with  milk  and  melted  Crisco.     Mix  and 
divide  into  Criscoed  gem  pans  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  twelve  minutes. 
Sufficient  for  twelve  muffins. 

Savarin 

1  yeast  cake  2  cupfuls  flour 

4  tablespoonfuls  sugar  }4  teaspoonful  salt 
yi  cupful  Crisco  3  eggs 

5  tablespoonfuls  lukewarm  2  tablespoonfuls  chopped 

water  almonds 

1  cupful  whipped  cream 

For  Syrup 

^  lb.  lump  sugar  3  cupfuls  water 

3  tablespoonfuls  lemon  juice 

For  cake.  Put  yeast  cake  into  cup,  add  1  tablespoonful  sugar,  1 
tablespoonful  flour,  and  lukewarm  water.  Allow  to  rise  ten  minutes. 
Put  flour  into  basin,  add  salt,  remainder  of  sugar,  almonds,  yeast  mixture, 
eggs  well  beaten,  and  Crisco  mdted  and  cooled.  Beat  ten  minutes  with 
wooden  spoon.  Turn  into  Criscoed  tube  mold.  Allow  to  rise  until  doubled 
in  size,  then  bake  in  quick  oven  forty-five  minutes.  Mold  should  be  sprin- 
kled over  with  shredded  almonds. 

For  syrup.  Boil  sugar  and  water  for  almost  forty-five  minutes,  then 
add  lemon  juice.  Soak  cake  with  syrup  and  when  cold  serve  with  cream 
in  center. 

Sufficient  for  one  savarin. 

110 


Breads,  etc. 

Shortbread  Cookies 

lyi  cupfuls  flour  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

yi  cupful  Crisco  1  egg 

}4  cupful  sugar  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

Beat  Crisco,  sugar,  and  salt  to  cream.  Add  gradually  egg  well  beaten, 
flour,  and  flavoring.  Knead  lightly  on  floured  baking  board,  then  roll 
out  one-fourth  inch  thick  and  cut  into  small  rounds.  Mark  them  with 
fork,  lay  on  Criscoed  tins  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  from  ten  to  fifteen 
minutes. 

Sufl&cient  for  forty  cookies. 

Soda  Beaten  Biscuit 

1  quart  flour  ^4  teaspoonful  salt 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  ^  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

Buttermilk 

Sift  flour  with  soda  and  salt,  then  rub  in  Crisco  thoroughly  with 
finger  tips,  and  mix  to  stiffs  dough  with  buttermilk.  Beat  with  rolling-pin 
or  hammer  until  dough  blisters.  Roll  out  one-third  inch  in  thickness,  cut 
with  round  cutter,  and  lay  on  Criscoed  tins.  Bake  in  moderate  oven  from 
thirty  to  forty  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  forty  biscuits. 

Sour  Milk  Biscuits 

(KaU  B.    Vaughn) 

2  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  salt 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  }4  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

1  cupful  sour  milk 

Sift  flour  and  salt  into  basin,  rub  Crisco  lightly  into  them.  Stir  soda 
into  milk  until  it  eflFcrvesces  and  then  add  to  flour.  Turn  out  on  floured 
baking  board,  knead  lightly  until  smooth,  roll  out  quarter  of  an  inch  thick, 
cut  with  biscuit  cutter,  place  on  greased  tin  and  bake  twelve  to  fifteen 
minutes  in  hot  oven. 

Sufficient  to  make  twelve  biscuits. 

Sour  Milk  Griddle  Cakes 

2  cupfuls  flour  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

1  tablespoonful  melted  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

2  cupfuls  sour  milk  1  egg 

1  tablespoonful  sugar 

Sift  dry  ingredients,  add  milk,  well  beaten  egg,  and  melted  Crisco. 
Drop  by  spoonfuls  on  hot  griddle,  greased  with  Crisco.    Cook  until  browned; 
ir^     then  turn  and  cook  on  other  side.     Serve  hot  with  syrup. 
Sufficient  for  eighteen  cakes. 

m 


Breads,  etc. 

Sour  MUk  Tea  Cakes 

1  cupful  cornmeal  2  cupfuls  flour 
4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco                   ^  cupful  sugar 

2  eggs  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 
Xyi  cupfuls  sour  milk  1  teaspoonful  salt 

1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

Beat  up  the  eggs,  add  meal  and  milk  and  mix  well,  add  flour,  sugar, 
soda,  and  salt  sifted  together.  Now  add  extract  and  Crisco,  melted,  and 
beat  two  minutes.  Divide  into  Criscoed  and  floured  gem  pans  and  bake 
in  moderate  oven  fifteen  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  sixteen  cakes. 

Steamed  Nut  Bread 

yi  pint  graham  flour  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

y^  cupful  Crisco  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

^  cupful  white  flour  1  cupful  milk 

1  cupful  chopped  English  1  cupful  sugar 

walnut  meats  1  egg 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  egg  well  beaten,  milk,  salt, 
flours,  baking  powder,  and  nuts.  Mix  and  turn  into  Criscoed  mold,  cover 
with  greased  paper  and  steam  two  hours.  This  nut  bread  is  delicious  served 
hot  with  butter.    It  may  be  served  as  a  pudding  with  cream  or  liquid  sauce. 

Sufficient  for  one  loaf. 

Southern  Spoon  Bread 

3  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         1  quart  milk 

2  cupfuls  cornmeal  1  teaspoonful  salt 

3  eggs 

Heat  milk  to  boiling  point,  then  stir  in  meal  and  salt;  add  Crisco  and 
cook  five  minutes.  Cool  mixture,  add  yolks  of  eggs  well  beaten,  then  beat 
whites  of  eggs  to  stiff  froth  and  fold  in.  Pour  batter  into  Criscoed  two- 
quart  pan  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  forty  minutes.  Serve  while  hot, 
using  a  spoon  with  which  to  serve  it.  This  is  especially  good  served  with 
roast  pork. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  pan  of  bread. 

Spice  Cookies 

3  eggs  1  teaspoonful  salt 

Xy^  cupfuls  brown  sugar  1  teaspoonful  powdered 
1  cupful  Crisco  cinnamon 

1  cupful  molasses  1  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger 
yi  cupful  sour  milk  1  teaspoonful  powdered  cloves 

2  teaspoonfuls  baking  soda  1  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 
yi  teaspoonful  black  pepper  yi  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

Flour  to  make  a  stiff  dough 

Beat  eggs  five  minutes,  then  add  sugar  and  beat  five  minutes,  then 
add  Crisco  and  beat  until  thoroughly  mixed,  add  molasses,  milk,  soda, 
salt,  spices,  baking  powder,  and  enough  flour  to  make  stiff  dough.  Leave 
mixture  in  basin  until  following  day.  Take  pieces  of  dough  and  roll  out, 
cut  with  small  cutter,  lay  on  Criscoed  tins  and  bake  in  moderate  oven 
from  seven  to  ten  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  ninety  cookies. 

112 


Breads,  etc. 

Swedish  Coffee  Bread 

2  cupfuls  hot  milk  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

^  cupful  sugar  15  cardamom  seeds 

yi  cupful  Crisco  1  yeast  cake 

2  cupfuls  flour 

Remove  seeds  from  cardamoms  and  grind  fine,  add  to  hot  milk  with 
Crisco,  sugar,  and  salt.  When  lukewarm  add  yeast  cake  mixed  with  a 
little  tepid  water  and  flour.  Mix  and  allow  to  rise.  Then  add  flour  enough 
to  make  stiff  dough.  Knead  and  let  rise  again,  then  make  into  rolls  or 
loaves.     Let  rise  again  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  till  ready. 

Sufficient  for  eighteen  rolls  or  two  small  loaves 

Swedish  Rye  Bread 

2  tablespoonfuls  sugar  1  yeast  cake 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  3  cupfuls  rye  flour 

2  teaspoonfuls  salt  1  cupful  white  flour 

4  cupfuls  boiling  water 

In  evening  add  Crisco,  sugar,  and  salt  to  boiling  water;  cool,  add 
yeast  cake  mixed  with  a  little  tepid  water  or  sugar,  rye  flour  and  white 
flour.  Allow  to  rise  and  in  morning  add  more  white  flour,  a  little  at  a  time, 
to  make  a  stiff^  dough.  Let  rise,  knead  again  and  bake  in  Criscoed  pie 
tins  or  cake  tins  as  it  will  rise  better  than  if  baked  in  bread  tins.  Bake  in 
hot  oven  half  hour.  When  taken  out  of  oven  brush  crust  with  a  little 
melted  Crisco. 

Sufficient  for  four  loaves. 

Twin  Biscuits 

1  cupful  milk  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 
yi  teaspoonful  salt  2  cupfuls  flour 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 

Sift  flour,  baking  powder,  and  salt  together,  rub  in  Crisco  with  tips  of 
fingers,  then  add  milk.  Pat  and  roll  out  dough,  cut  with  cutter,  brush  with 
melted  Crisco,  place  one  on  top  of  another,  lay  on  Criscoed  tin  and  bake 
in  hot  oven  from  ten  to  twelve  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  twelve  biscuits. 

Waffles 

3  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  salt 

2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  1  tablespoonful  sugar 
}4  teaspoonful  baking  soda                2  cupfuls  sour  milk 

2  eggs 

Mix  and  sift  dry  ingredients,  add  milk  gradually,  yolks  of  eggs  well 
beaten,  melted  Crisco,  and  whites  of  eggs  beaten  to  stiff"  froth;  cook  on 
hot  waffle  iron  greased  with  Crisco.  Serve  with  maple  syrup,  or  honey 
and  butter. 

Waffles  may  be  served  for  breakfast,  luncheon,  supper  or  high  tea.  A 
waffle  iron  should  fit  closely  on  range,  be  well  heated  on  one  side,  turned, 
heated  on  other  side,  and  thoroughly  greased  with  Crisco  before  iron  is 
filled.     In  filling,  put  tablespoonful  of  mixture  in  each  compartment  near 

113 


Breads,  etc. 

the  center  of  iron,  cover,  and  mixture  will  spread  to  fill  iron.    If  sufficiently 
heated,  it  should  be  turned  almost  as  soon  as  filled  and  covered.     In  using 
new  iron,  special  care  must  be  taken  in  greasing,  or  waffles  will  stick. 
Sufficient  for  six  waffles. 

White  Cookies 

2  cupfuls  sugar  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

1  cupful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  salt 

}4  cupful  thick  sour  milk  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

2  eggs  yi  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

Flour 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  eggs  well  beaten,  soda  mixed 
with  sour  milk,  salt,  extracts,  and  about  5  cupfuls  flour.  Roll  very  thin, 
cut  with  cookie  cutter,  lay  on  Criscoed  tins,  bake  in  moderately  hot  oven 
five  minutes.  To  keep  any  length  of  time,  when  cold,  place  in  covered 
tin  cans  and  set  in  cool  place,  and  they  will  be  as  crisp  as  when  first  baked. 

Sufficient  for  ninety  cookies. 

Yorkshire  Fruit  Loaves 

2  lbs.  flour  1  cupful  sultana  raisins 

^  cupful  Crisco  1  cupful  currants 

1  teaspoonful  salt  yi  cupful  seeded  raisins 

2  cupfuls  milk  ^  cupful  chopped  candied 
1  yeast  cake  citron  peel 

1  cupful  sugar  1  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger 

yi  teaspoonful  powdered  mace 

Heat  Crisco  in  milk,  then  cool  and  add  yeast  cake  mixed  with  a  little 
sugar;  stir  in  flour  and  salt,  and  allow  to  rise  four  hours.  Mix  sugar, 
fruit,  peel,  and  spices  into  risen  dough.  Let  rise  again  then  divide  into 
two  Criscoed  loaf  tins.  Allow  to  rise  fifteen  minutes,  then  bake  in  moderate 
oven  one  and  a  half  hours. 

Sufficient  for  two  medium-sized  loaves. 

Water  Bread 

2  cupfuls  boiling  water  2  teaspoonfuls  salt 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  yi  yeast  cake  dissolved  in 

1  tablespoonful  sugar  %  cupful  lukewarm  water 

About  six  cupfuls  sifted  flour 

Mix  Crisco,  sugar  and  salt,  pour  on  boiling  water;  when  lukewarm 
add  dissolved  yeast  cake.  Stir  in  enough  flour  to  make  a  batter;  beat  well, 
then  add  more  flour,  a  little  at  a  time  to  make  stiff"  dough,  mixing  with  a 
knife.  Turn  on  a  floured  board;  knead  until  it  is  smooth,  elastic  and  does 
not  stick  to  the  board.  Put  into  a  bowl  greased  with  Crisco,  cover  closely 
and  let  stand  in  a  warm  place  over  night.  The  first  thing  in  the  morning 
knead  again  until  fine  grained;  shape  into  loaves  and  place  in  a  warm  pan 
greased  with  Crisco.  Cover  and  put  in  a  warm  place.  When  double  in 
bulk,  bake  in  a  hot  oven.     Bake  one  hour. 

114 


CAiCE 


I  HERE  are  five  principal  ways  of  making 
cakes. 

The  first  method  is  used  for  plain 
cakes.  The  shortening  is  rubbed  into 
the  flour  in  the  same  way  as  for  short  pastry;  then  the  dry 
ingredients,  such  as  sugar,  fruit,  and  spice,  are  added,  and 
lastly  the  eggs  and  milk.     Then  all  are  mixed  well  together. 

The  second  way  is  used  for  fruit,  pound,  and  seed  cakes. 
The  shortening  and  sugar  are  creamed  together,  the  eggs 
beaten  in  one  at  a  time,  and  the  fruit  and  flour  stirred  in 
lightly  and  quickly  at  the  last. 

In  the  third  way  the  eggs  and  sugar  are  beaten  together 
until  thick  and  creamy,  then  the  flour  is  stirred  in  lightly  and 
quickly.  This  is  used  chiefly  for  sponge  cakes  and  cakes  of 
that  texture. 

For  the  fourth  way  the  sugar,  shortening,  milk,  and  syrup 
or  molasses  are  melted  together,  then  cooled  slightly  and 
added  to  the  dry  ingredients.  This  method  is  used  for  ginger- 
breads. 

In  the  fifth  way  the  sugar  and  eggs  are  beaten  thor- 
oughly over  boiling  water,  then  cooled  before  the  melted  short- 
ening and  dry  ingredients  are  added.  This  method  is  used  for 
Gennoise  cake  and  some  kinds  of  layer  cakes.  Care  must  be 
taken  to  insure  the  right  consistency  of  cakes.  The  mixture 
should  be  fairly  stiff".  If  too  moist  the  fruit  will  sink  to  the 
bottom.  For  rich  cakes  the  tins  should  be  lined  with  paper, 
the  paper  coming  a  short  distance  above  the  tins,  so  that  the 
cake  is  protected  as  it  rises.  For  very  rich  fruit  cakes,  ex- 
perience has  shown  that  it  is  best  not  to  grease  the  paper  or 
tin.  The  cake  is  not  so  liable  to  burn,  and  the  paper  can  be 
removed  easily  when  the  cake  is  done  without  injuring  it. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  tins  are  lined  for  sponge  cakes  or  jelly- 
rolls,  the  paper  should  be  greased. 


Cakes 

When  making  cakes  in  which  baking  powder,  carbonate 
of  soda,  cream  of  tartar  or  tartaric  acid  are  used,  almost 
everything  depends  upon  the  handling,  which  should  be  as 
light  and  as  little  as  possible.  The  more  rapidly  such  cakes 
are  made  the  better  they  will  be.  Two  cooks  working  from 
the  same  recipe  will  often  produce  entirely  different  results, 
if  one  kneads  her  mixture  as  if  it  were  household  bread, 
while  the  other  handles  it  with  due  lightness  of  touch.  As 
soon  as  the  baking  powder  or  other  rising  medium  is  added 
to  the  mixture,  the  cake  should  be  put  into  the  oven  as  quickly 
as  possible.  Soda  alone  is  never  good  in  a  cake  where  there 
is  shortening,  unless  some  substance  containing  acid  is  used 
along  with  it.  Molasses  is  one  of  the  substances  containing 
acid. 

The  greatest  care  and  cleanliness  must  be  exercised  in  all 
cake  making;  and  accuracy  in  proportioning  the  materials 
to  be  used  is  indispensable.  The  flour  should  be  thoroughly 
dried  and  sifted,  and  lightly  stirred  in.  Always  sift  flour 
before  measuring,  then  sift  it  again  with  the  baking  powder 
to  insure  a  thorough  blending. 

Good  cakes  never  can  be  made  with  indifferent  materials. 
Eggs  are  used  both  as  an  aerating  agent  and  as  one  of  the 
"wetting"  materials.  It  is  not  economy  to  buy  cheap  eggs, 
for  such  eggs  are  small,  weak,  colorless,  and  often  very  stale. 
Eggs  should  be  well  beaten,  yolks  and  whites  separately, 
unless  other  directions  are  given.  The  yolks  must  be  beaten 
to  a  thick  cream  and  the  whites  until  they  are  a  solid  froth. 
Sugar  tends  to  improve  the  texture  of  cakes,  and  when  cheap 
cakes  are  made,  plenty  should  be  used,  provided  that  the  cake 
is  not  made  too  sweet.  It  should  be  dissolved  before  being 
added  to  the  fat  and  the  flour. 

For  best  cakes,  and  all  that  are  required  of  a  light  color, 
fine-grained  sugar  should  be  used.  With  coarse-grained 
sugar  there  is  danger  of  producing  specks  which  show  on  the 
cakes  after  baking,  unless  they  have  been  made  by  the  method 
of  beating  up  the  eggs  and  sugar  together  with  a  beater  over 
hot  water.    This  method  will  dissolve  the  grains  of  sugar. 

Always  buy  the  best  fruits  for  cake  making,  as  they  are 
sweetest  and  cleanest.  Currants  and  sultana  raisins  for  cakes 
should  not  be  too  large,  but  of  medium  size,  sweet  and 
fleshy.  Cheap  dry  sultanas  should  not  be  used.  Though 
there  is  no  need  to  wash  sultanas,  yet  if  the  fruit  is  inclined 

116 


Cahes 

to  be  very  dry,  it  will  be  better  to  do  so  than  to  put  them 
in  to  spoil  the  appearance  and  the  flavor  of  the  cake.  Cur- 
rants always  should  be  washed,  cleaned,  and  dried  before 
using.  Orange,  lemon,  and  citron  peel  should  be  of  good 
color  and  flavor.  They  should  not  be  added  to  cake  mixture 
in  chunks,  as  often  is  done,  but  should  be  in  long  shredded 
pieces.  Large  pieces  of  peel  are  sometimes  the  cause  of  a 
cake  cutting  badly.  In  making  fruit  cakes  add  the  fruit  before 
the  flour,  as  this  will  prevent  it  falling  to  the  bottom. 

If  a  cake  cracks  open  while  baking,  the  recipe  contains 
too  much  flour.  There  are  two  kinds  of  thick  crusts  which 
some  cakes  have.  The  first  of  these  is  caused  by  the  cake 
being  overbaked  in  a  very  hot  oven.  Where  this  is  so,  the 
cake,  if  a  very  rich  one,  has  a  huge  crack  in  the  top  caused  by 
the  heat  of  the  oven  forming  a  crust  before  the  inside  has 
finished  aerating;  then  as  the  interior  air  or  gas  expands,  it 
cracks  the  crust  to  escape.  This  crack  spoils  the  appearance 
of  the  cake,  and  when  cut  it  generally  will  be  found  to  be 
close  and  heavy  in  texture.  To  guard  against  this  it  is  nec- 
essary to  bake  them  at  a  suitable  temperature,  noting  that  the 
richer  the  cake  the  longer  the  fruit  takes  to  bake. 

The  second  kind  of  thick  crust  referred  to  may  only  be 
on  top  of  the  cake,  and  in  this  case  may  be  caused  by  an 
excess  of  .fat  and  sugar  being  mixed  together,  or  otherwise 
insufllicient  flour.  In  this  case  the  mixture  will  not  bake, 
but  only  forms  a  kind  of  syrup  in  the  oven,  and  the  cake  sinks 
in  the  center.  A  cake  made  under  such  conditions  would  have 
a  thick  shiny  crust,  and  be  liable  to  crumble  when  touched. 
The  inside  of  the  cake  would  be  heavy,  having  more  the  ap-, 
pearance  of  pudding  than  cake. 

Successful  cake  making  means  constant  care.  In  recipes 
in  which  milk  is  used  as  one  ingredient,  either  sweet  or  butter- 
milk may  be  used  but  not  a  mixture  of  both.  Buttermilk 
makes  a  light,  spongy  cake,  and  sweet  milk  makes  a  cake 
which  cuts  like  pound  cake.  In  creaming  shortening  and 
sugar,  when  the  shortening  is  too  hard  to  blend  easily  warm  the 
bowl  slightly,  but  do  not  heat  the  shortening,  as  this  will  change 
both  the  flavor  and  texture  of  the  cake.  For  small  cakes  have  a 
quick  oven,  so  that  they  set  right  through,  and  the  inside 
is  baked  by  the  time  the  outside  is  browned.  For  all  large 
cakes  have  a  quick  oven  at  first,  to  raise  them  nicely  and 
prevent  the  fruit  sinking  to  the  bottom.  The  oven  then  should 
be  allowed  to  become  slower  to  fire  the  cakes  thoroughly. 

117 


Cakes 

Cake  must  not  be  hurried.  Keep  the  oven  steady  though 
slow,  and  after  putting  a  large  cake  into  it  do  not  open  the 
door  for  at  least  twenty  minutes.  During  baking,  do  not 
open  the  door  unnecessarily,  or  in  fact  do  anything  to  jar  the 
cake  lest  the  little  bubbles  formed  by  the  action  of  the  baking 
powder  burst,  causing  the  gas  to  escape  and  the  cake  to  sink. 
This  produces  what  is  known  as  a  "sad"  cake,  but  refers 
probably  to  the  state  of  mind  of  the  cook.  A  very  light 
cake  put  into  a  quick  oven  rises  rapidly  round  the  sides,  but 
leaves  a  hollow  in  the  middle. 

If  a  cake  is  made  too  light  with  eggs  or  powder  and  an 
insufficient  quantity  of  flour  is  added  it  will  drop  in  the  center. 
Another  frequent  cause  is  the  moving  of  cakes  while  in  the 
oven  before  the  mixture  has  set  properly.  The  same  defect 
is  produced  if  the  cakes  are  removed  from  the  oven  before 
being  baked  sufficiently.  When  a  cake  batter  curdles,  the 
texture  will  not  be  so  even  as  if  the  curdling  had  not  taken 
place.  Sometimes  the  mixture  will  curdle  through  the  eggs 
being  added  too  quickly,  or  if  the  shortening  contains  too 
much  water.  This  forms  a  syrup  with  the  sugar,  and  after  a 
certain  quantity  of  eggs  have  been  added  the  batter  will  slip 
and  slide  about,  and  will  not  unite  with  the  other  in- 
gredients. Weak,  watery  eggs  are  another  cause  of  this 
happening;  and  although  this  may  be  checked  by  adding  a 
little  flour  at  the  right  time,  yet  the  cake  would  be  better 
if  it  were  unnecessary  to  add  any  flour  until  all  the  eggs  haci 
been  beaten  in,  that  is,  if  the  batter  had  not  curdled.  Before 
turning  out  a  cake  allow  it  to  remain  in  the  tin  for  a  few  min- 
utes. It  is  best  to  lay  it  on  a  wire  cake  stand,  or  lay  it  on 
a  sieve;  but  if  you  do  not  possess  these,  a  loosely  made 
basket  turned  upside  down  will  do.  If  the  cake  will  not  turn 
out  of  the  tin  easily,  rest  it  on  its  side,  turning  it  round  in  a 
couple  of  minutes  and  it  may  loosen,  if  not,  pass  a  knife 
round  the  edge,  turn  the  cake  over  on  a  clean  cloth,  and  let 
it  stand  a  few  minutes. 

Do  not  place  cakes  in  a  cold  place  or  at  an  open  window, 
or  the  steam  will  condense  and  make  them  heavy,  A  rich 
cake  improves  in  flavor  and  becomes  softer  with  keeping 
(from  2  to  6  weeks,  according  to  quality)  before  cutting. 
Wrap,  when  cold,  first  in  a  clean  towel,  then  in  paper.  After 
a  week  remove  the  paper  and  put  the  cake  into  a  tin  wrapped 
in  the  towel.  Small  cakes  may  be  baked  in  tiny  molds  or 
tins,  or  baked  in  a  flat  sheet,  and  then  cut  out  into  squares, 

118 


Cakes 

diamonds  or  rounds.  Then  they  can  be  frosted  or  coated 
with  cream  and  decorated  with  cherries  or  other  crystalHzed 
fruits.  If  a  real  distinction  is  desired,  they  may  be  placed  in 
tiny  crinkled  paper  cases,  bought  by  the  hundred  at  a  trifling 
cost. 

Cake  tins  should  be  greased  with  Crisco  and  dredged 
with  flour,  the  superfluous  flour  shaken  out,  or  they  can  be 
fitted  with  paper  which  has  been  greased  with  Crisco.  When 
creaming  Crisco  and  sugar,  do  not  grudge  hard  work;  at 
this  stage  of  manufacture  the  tendency  is  to  give  insufficient 
work,  with  the  result  that  the  lightness  of  the  cake  is  im- 
paired. 


Apple  Sauce  Fruit  Cake  without  Milk 

1  cupful  brown  sugar  1  teaspoonful  powdered 
1^  cupfuls  apple  sauce  cinnamon 

2}4  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

}4  cupful  Crisco  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  soda 

1  lb.  raisins  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

1  teaspoonful  powdered  cloves  3  tablespoonfuls  vinegar 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  thoroughly  together,  add  apple  sauce,  flour, 
raisins,  spices,  salt,  and  soda  mixed  with  vinegar.  Mix  and  pour  into 
greased  and  floured  cake  tin  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  one  and  a  half 
hours. 

Sufficient  for  one  cake. 


Black  Cake  with  Prune  Filling 

15^  cupfuls  sugar  >^  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

54  teaspoonful  salt  2  cupfuls  flour 

3  eggs  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

yi  cupful  Crisco  yi  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

1  cupful  milk  y^  cake  chocolate 

For  Filling 

1  cupful  sugar  yi  cupful  stoned  stewed  prunes 

y3  cupful  boiling  water  ^  cupful  blanched  chopped 

1  white  of  egg  almonds 

For  cake.  Beat  1  egg  in  double  boiler,  add  }4  cupful  milk,  ^ 
cupful  sugar  and  chocolate;  mix  well  and  cook  until  it  thickens.  Cool 
and  set  aside.  Cream  Crisco  with  remainder  of  sugar,  add  salt,  eggs  well 
beaten,  soda   mixed  with  remainder  of  milk,  flour,  baking  powder  and 

119 


Cakes 

vanilla.  Mix  well  and  add  chocolate  paste,  and  divide  into  two  Criscoed 
and  floured  layer  cake  tins.     Bake  twenty  minutes  in  moderate  oven. 

For  filling.  Boil  sugar  and  water  together  without  stirring  until  it 
forms  a  soft  ball  when  tried  in  cold  water,  or  240°  F.,  then  pour  it  over 
the  beaten  white  of  egg,  beating  all  the  time.  Now  add  chopped  prunes  and 
almonds  and  beat  well.     Put  between  layers  of  cake. 

Sufficient  for  one  good-sized  layer  cake. 

Pound  Cake 

2  cupfuls  sugar  12  eggs 

2  cupfuls  Crisco  4  cupfuls  flour 

2  teaspoonfuls  salt  }4  teaspoonful  powdered  mace 

•3  tablespoonfuls  brandy 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  thoroughly  together,  add  yolks  of  eggs  well 
beaten,  fold  in  whites  of  eggs  beaten  to  a  stiflF  froth,  add  brandy,  flour, 
salt  and  mace,  and  mix  lightly  and  quickly.  Turn  into  a  papered  cake 
pan  and  bake  in  a  slow  oven  for  one  hour  and  twenty  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  cake. 

Boiling  Water  Cake 

1  cupful  boiling  water  1  cupful  sultana  raisins 

1  cupful  sugar  2K  cupfuls  flour 

}4  cupful  Crisco  }i  teaspoonful  salt 

1  egg  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 
j4  cupful  chopped  candied  yi  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

citron  peel  ^  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

Put  Crisco  and  sugar  into  basin,  pour  boiling  water  over  them;  let 
stand  till  cold,  then  add  egg  well  beaten,  sift  in  flour,  salt,  baking  powder, 
and  nutmeg,  add  peel,  raisins,  and  lemon  extract,  and  mix  well.  Turn  into 
greased  and  floured  small  square  tin  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  half  hour. 
Cool  and  cover  with  boiled  frosting. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  cake. 

Butterless-Milkless-Eggless  Cake 

2  cupfuls  brown  sugar  1  teaspoonful  powdered  cloves 
>^  cupful  Crisco                                  yi  teaspoonful  powdered  mace 

2  cupfuls  water  yi  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

2  cupfuls  sultana  raisins  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  soda 

2  cupfuls  seeded  raisins  4  cupfuls  flour 

1  teaspoonful  salt  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

2  teaspoonfuls  powdered  \14  cupfuls  chopped  nut  meats 

cinnamon  3  tablespoonfuls  warm  water 

Put  Crisco  into  saucepan,  add  sugar,  water,  raisins,  salt,  and  spices, 
and  boil  three  minutes.  Cool,  and  when  cold  add  flour,  baking  powder, 
soda  dissolved  in  warm  water  and  nut  meats.  Mix  and  turn  into  Criscoed 
and  floured  cake  tin  and  bake  in  slow  oven  one  and  a  half  hours. 

Sufficient  for  one  medium-sized  cake. 

120 


Cakes 

Caramel  Cake 
For  Cake 

1}^  cupfuls  sifted  sugar  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

2  eggs  1  teaspoonful  vanilia  extract 
yi  cupful  Crisco                                 }4  cupful  granulated  sugar 

1  cupful  cold  water  }4  teaspoonful  salt       * 

3  cupfuls  flour  X  cupful  boiling  water 

For  Filling 

1  teaspoonful  Crisco  }4  cupful  brown  sugar 

1  ounce  chocolate  yi  cupful  granulated  sugar 
1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract  Pinch  salt 

yi  cupful  hot  water 

For  cake.  Put  granulated  sugar  into  small  pan  and  melt  over  fire 
till  brown,  remove  from  fire,  add  boiling  water,  stir  quickly,  return  to 
stove,  and  stir  until  thick  syrup;  set  aside  to  cool.  Beat  Crisco  and  sugar 
to  a  cream,  add  eggs  well  beaten,  flour,  baking  powder,  salt,  vanilla,  three 
tablespoonfuls  of  the  syrup  and  water.  Mix  and  beat  two  minutes,  then 
divide  into  two  Criscoed  and  floured  layer  tins  and  bake  in  moderate  oven 
twenty  minutes. 

For  filling.  Melt  granulated  sugar  in  small  pan  and  stir  until  it 
becomes  a  light  brown  syrup,  add  the  water  gradually,  then  brown  sugar, 
Crisco,  salt,  and  chocolate,  stirring  all  the  time.  Cook  until  it  forms  a 
soft  ball  when  tried  in  cold  water,  or  240°  F.  Remove  from  fire,  add  van- 
illa, beat  until  creamy,  then  spread  between  cakes. 

Suflacient  for  one  layer  cake. 

Chocolate  Cake 

For  Cake 

1  cupful  sugar  2  cupfuls  flour 

^  teaspoonful  salt  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

yi  cupful  grated  chocolate  ^  cupful  sultana  raisins 

^  cupful  Crisco  y^  cupful  candied  chopped 
S  eggs  citron  peel 

For  Chocolate  Frosting 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  2  cupfuls  powdered  sugar 
2  squares  melted  bitter  6  tablespoonfuls  coflFee 

chocolate  ^  teaspoonful  salt 

yi  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

For  cake.  Cream  Crisco;  add  sugar  gradually,  yolks  of  eggs  well 
beaten,  milk,  flour,  salt,  baking  powder,  grated  chocolate,  citron,  and 
raisins.  Mix  and  beat  two  minutes,  then  fold  in  stiffly  beaten  whites  of 
eggs.  Turn  into  Criscoed  and  floured  tin  and  bake  for  one  and  a  quarter 
hours  in  a  moderate  oven.    When  cold  cover  with  frosting 

For  chocolate  frosting.  Knead  Crisco  into  sugar.  Melt  chocolate, 
add  coflFee,  sugar,  salt,  and  Crisco,  and  stir  until  thick,  then  add  vanilla 

121 


Cakes 

and  put  away  to  cool.    When  cold  spread  on  cake.     This  frosting  may  be 
used  any  time.    It  is  just  as  good  made  one  day  and  used  the  next  by  add- 
ing a  little  more  hot  coffee.    It  is  always  soft,  creamy  and  delicious. 
Sufficient  for  one  cake. 

Cocoanut  Layer  Cake 

For  Cake 

1  cupful  sugar  yi  cupful  Crisco 

3  cupfuls  flour  1  cupful  milk 

}i  teaspoonful  salt  2  teaspoonfuls  vanilla  extract 

4  eggs  3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

For  Filling 

1  teaspoonful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

1  cupful  sugar  I  white  of  egg 

1  cupful  water  }4  cupful  chopped  cocoanut 

Pinch  cream  of  tartar  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

For  cake.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  sift  the  flour,  baking 
powder,  and  salt,  and  add  alternately  with  the  beaten  yolks  of  eggs  and 
milk.  Beat  thoroughly,  then  add  stiffly  beaten  whites  of  eggs  and  flavoring 
and  mix  gently.  Grease  layer  tins  with  Crisco, then  flour  them  and  divide 
mixture  into  three  portions.     Bake  in  a  moderate  oven  twenty  minutes. 

For  filling.  Boil  water  and  sugar  together,  add  Crisco  and  cream  of 
tartar,  and  boil  until  it  forms  a  soft  ball  when  tried  in  cold  water,  or  240°  F. 
Beat  white  of  egg  to  stiff  froth,  add  salt,  then  pour  in  syrup  gradually, 
add  vanilla  and  beat  until  thick  and  cold.  Spread  on  cake  and  sprinkle  over 
with  cocoanut. 

Sufficient  for  three  layers. 

Coffee  Layer  Cake 
Dark  Part 

1  cupful  dark  brown  sugar  2  cupfuls  flour 

^  cupful  cold  strong  coffee  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

3  yolks  of  eggs  yi  teaspoonful  powdered 
yi  cupful  Crisco  cinnamon 

1  tablespoonful  molasses  yi  teaspoonful  powdered  cloves 

yi  cupful  raisins  yi  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 
yi  teaspoonful  salt 

White  Part 

yi  cupful  Crisco  2  cupfuls  flour 

1  cupful  granulated  sugar  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

*   3  whites  of  eggs  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

y^  cupful  milk  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

For  dark  part.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar,  add  yolks  well  beaten,  coffee, 
molasses,  flour,  salt,  baking  powder,  spices  and  raisins.  Mix  and  divide 
into  two  Criscoed  and  floured  layer  tins  and  bake  in  moderately  hot  oven 
twenty  minutes. 

For  white  part.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar,  add  milk,  vanilla,  flour,  salt, 
baking  powder,  then  fold  in  stiffly  beaten  whites  of  eggs.  Bake  in  two 
layers.    Put  layers  together  and  ice  with  following  frosting. 

122 


Cakfs 

Put  2  cupfuls  dark  brown  sugar  and  ^  cupful  water  into  saucepan, 
add  1  tablespoonful  Crisco  and  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract.  Boil  till 
mixture  forms  soft  ball  when  tried  in  cold  water,  or  240°  F.,  remove  from 
stove,  beat  till  it  begins  to  cream,  then  add  1  cupful  chopped  raisins. 
Spread  on  cake  and  allow  to  dry. 

Sufficient  £or  one  large  layer  cake. 

Cream  Puffs 

1  cupful  water  5  tablespoonfuis  Crisco 

1  cupful  flour  4  eggs 

y(  teaspoonful  salt 

Put  Crisco  into  small  saucepan, add  water,  bring  to  boiling  point,  add 
quickly  flour  and  salt,  stir  well  with  wooden  spoon  until  mixture  leaves 
sides  of  pan,  remove  pan  from  fire,  allow  mixture  to  become  cool,  but  not 
cold,  add  eggs,  one  at  a  time,  and  beat  each  one  thoroughly  in.  Set  in 
cool  place  one  hour.  Put  mixture  into  forcing  bag  with  tube  and  force 
it  on  to  a  tin  greased  with  Crisco  into  small  rounds;  bake  in  hot  oven  forty 
minutes.  When  cold  split  them  open  on  one  side  and  fill  with  whipped 
cream  sweetened  and  flavored  to  taste. 

To  make  eclairs  with  this  mixture  press  it  on  to  tins  in  strips  three 
and  a  half  inches  long,  and  a  little  distance  apart.  Brush  over  tops  with 
beaten  egg  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  thirty  minutes.  Cut  open  one 
side,  then  fill  and  dip  top  into  chocolate  icing. 

Sufficient  for  fifteen  cream  puflFs. 

Cream  Puff  Balls 

1  cupful  flour  >^  cupful  water 
}4  cupful  Crisco  4  eggs 

}4  teaspoonful  salt 

Put  Crisco  and  water  into  small  saucepan,  bring  to  boil,  add  quickly 
flour  and  salt,  stir  well  with  wooden  spoon  until  mixture  leaves  sides  of 
pan,  remove  from  fire,  allow  to  cool,  but  not  become  cold,  add  eggs,  beat- 
ing each  one  thoroughly  in.  Turn  mixture  on  to  well  Criscoed  plate  and 
divide  into  small  puffs  or  cakes.  Put  on  Criscoed  tins  and  bake  a  golden 
brown  in  hot  oven,  thirty  minutes.  These  puff^s  may  be  filled  with  pre- 
serves, custard,  or  savory  mixtures. 

Sufficient  for  thirty  puff^s. 

Crisco  Fruit  Cake 

\}4  cupfuls  Crisco  1  lb.  seeded  raisins 

2  cupfuls  sugar  1  lb.  glace  cherries 

4  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

6  eggs  1  teaspoonful  salt 

1  wineglassful  brandy  3^  cupful  New  Orleans 

yi  lb.  blanched  and  chopped  molasses 

almonds  }4  cupful  cold  black  coflFee 

^2  lb.  English  walnut  meats  1  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

(broken  in  small  pieces)  2  teaspoonfuls  powdered 

J4  lb.  stoned  and  chopped  dates  cinnamon 

1  lb.  currants  1  teaspoonful  powdered  cloves 
Cream   Crisco  and   sugar  together,   add   eggs  well   beaten,   beat  five 

minutes,  then  add  coflFee,  soda  mixed  with  molasses,  brandy,  flour  sifted 

123 


Cakes 

with  salt  and  spices.     Now  add  raisins,  currants,  dates,  cherries  cut  in 
halves,  and  nuts.     Mix  carefully  and  turn  into  Criscoed  and  papered  tin 
and  bake  in  moderate  oven  two  and  a  half  hours.     Brandy  may  be  omitted. 
Sufficient  for  one  large  cake. 

Devils  Food  Cake 

lyi  cupfuls  sugar  2  cupfuls  flour 

lyi  cupfuls  milk  yi  cupful  Crisco 

}i  cake  chocolate  1  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

2  teaspoonfuls  vanilla  extract  3  tablespoonfuls  boiling  water 

2  eggs  Boiled  frosting 

yi  teaspoonful  salt 

Put  yi  cupful  of  sugar  into  small  saucepan,  add  chocolate  and  1  cup- 
ful milk.  Put  on  stove  and  stir  till  it  boils  five  minutes,  stirring  now  and 
then.  Remove  from  fire,  add  vanilla  and  set  aside  to  cool.  Beat  Crisco 
and  remainder  of  sugar  to  light  cream,  then  add  eggs  well  beaten  and  beat 
two  minutes.  Now  add  remainder  of  milk,  soda  dissolved  in  boiling  water, 
flour,  salt,  and  chocolate  mixture.  Mix  carefully  and  divide  into  two 
large  greased  and  floured  layer  tins  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  twenty- 
five  minutes.    Turn  to  cool  and  put  together  with  boiled  frosting. 

Sufficient  for  two  large  layers. 

Peach  Shortcake 

2  cupfuls  sugar  yi  cupful  Crisco 

1  cupful  milk  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

5  eggs  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

3  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  almond  extract 

Quartered  peaches 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  then  add  milk,  eggs  one  by  one, 
always  beating  well  between  each  one,  flour  sifted  with  baking  powder 
and  salt,  then  add  extract.  Mix  and  divide  into  two  layer  tins  that  have 
been  greased  with  Crisco  and  bake  twenty  minutes  in  moderate  oven. 
Turn  out  and  spread  with  butter.  Put  together  with  quartered  and  sweet- 
ened peaches  and  pile  some  peaches  on  top. 

Sufficient  for  one  cake. 

Strawberry  Shortcake 

3  cupfuls  flour  1  egg 

yi  cupful  Crisco  2  tablespoonfuls  sugar 

yi  teaspoonful  salt  1  cupful  milk 

3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  \}4  pints  strawberries 

1  cupful  whipped  cream 

Sift  the  flour  with  the  baking  powder,  salt  and  sugar,  then  cut  in  the 
Crisco  with  a  knife,  add  egg  well  beaten,  and  milk.  The  dough  should  be 
a  soft  one.  Roll  in  two  layers,  spread  in  two  Criscoed  pans  and  bake,  in 
a  hot  oven  until  a  light  brown  color.  Mash  and  sweeten  one  cupfu^'of 
the  strawberries,  put  on  one  layer,  then  place  second  layer  on  top. 
Sweeten  remainder  of  strawberries,  spread  on  top  layer,  and  cover  with 
the  whipped  cream.     Decorate  with  whole  ripe  strawberries. 

124 


Cakes 


Fig  Cake 


1  cupful  sugar  yi  cupful  Crisco 

3  eggs  3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

1  cupful  milk  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

2  teaspoonfuls  powdered  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

cinnamon  }4  teasp'oonful  grated  nutmeg 

3  cupfuls  flour  1  cupful  shredded  figs 

Wash  and  dry  figs  then  shred  them.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together, 
add  eggs  well  beaten,  and  beat  five  minutes.  Sift  dry  ingredients,  and 
add  to  first  mixture  alternately  with  milk.  Add  figs  and  flavorings  and 
turn  into  Criscoed  and  floured  cake  tin.     Bake  one  hour  in  moderate  oven. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  cake. 


Gennoise  Cake 

^  cupful  flour  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

6  tablespoonfuls  sugar  yi  teaspoonful  almond  extract 

6  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  Boiled  frosting 

4  eggs  Preserved  cherries  or  cocoanut 

y^  teaspoonful  salt 

Break  eggs  into  bowl,  add  sugar  and  beat  for  ten  minutes  over  a  pan 
of  boiling  water.  Remove  from  water  and  beat  till  mixture  is  thick  and 
cold;  remove  beater,  sift  in  flour,  salt,  and  baking  powder;  mix  carefully, 
add  melted  Crisco  and  almond  extract.  Turn  at  once  into  small  square 
greased  and  papered  tin  and  bake  in  a  moderate  oven  twenty  minutes. 
Turn  out  and  remove  paper.  Cool  and  cut  in  eight  square  pieces.  Cover 
with  boiled  frosting  and  decorate  with  cherries  or  cocoanut. 

Sufficient  for  eight  small  cakes. 


Gingerbread 

yi  cupful  sugar                 _  2  teaspoonfuls  powdered  ginger 

1  egg  1  teaspoonful  powdered 

yii  cupful  molasses  cinnamon 

yi  cupful  milk  yi  teaspoonful  powdered  cloves 

\y^  cupfuls  flour  yi  teaspoonful    baking   soda   or 

yi  cupful  Crisco  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  pow- 

1  teaspoonful  salt  der 

Sauce 

1  teaspoonful  Crisco  1  tablespoonful  flour 

1  cupful  (>^  lb.)  maple  sugar  1  egg 

1  cupful  boiling  water 

For  cake.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  egg  well  beaten, 
molasses,  milk,  soda,  flour,  salt,  and  spices.  Mix  and  turn  into  Criscoed 
tin  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  forty  minutes. 

125 


Cakes 

For  sauce.  Dissolve  maple  sugar  in  boiling  water.  Rub  togetliei- 
Crisco  and  flour.  Add  gradually  boiling  syrup;  and  lastly  the  beaten  egg. 
Then  return  to  fire  and  stir  briskly  until  thickened. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  gingerbread. 

Golden  Orange  Cake 

'2  cupfuls  s\lgai-  S  eggs  or  yolks  of  10  eggs 

I  teaspoonful  salt    '  4  cupfuls  flour 

\  teaspoonful  orange  extract  1  cupful  Crisco 

1  cupful  milk  4  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

Orange  icing 

For  cake.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  salt,  eggs  well 
beaten,  orange  extract,  and  flour  and  baking  powder  alternately  with  milk. 
Mix  carefully  and  turn  into  Criscoed  and  floured  cake  tin  and  bake  in 
moderate  oven  about  one  hour.    This  mixture  may  be  baked  in  layers. 

For  icing.  Boil  1  ..cupful  water  with  2  cupfuls  sugar  till  it  forms 
soft  ball  when  tried  in  cold  water,  or  240°  F.,  then  pour  over  well  beaten 
yolks  of  four  eggs,  beat  until  smooth  and  thick,  add  1)4  teaspoonfuls 
orange  extract  and  spread  at  once  on  cake. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  cake. 

Gold  Cake 

{KaU  B.  Vauthn)  jft 

K  cupful  sugar  \yi  cupfuls  flour 
5  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  ^  teaspoonful  salt 

]/2  cupful  milk  3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

4  yolks  of  eggs  ]/2  teaspoonful  lemoh  extract 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together.  Beat  egg  yolks  very  light  and  add 
to  creamed  mixture.  Add  dry  ingredients,  milk,  and  lemon  extract  and 
mix  well.  Turn  into  a  small  Criscoed  and  floured  cake  tin  and  bake  in 
moderate  oven  forty-five  minutes. 

Sufllicient  for  one  small  cake. 

HvKTy  Up  Cake 

y^  cupful  sugar  yi  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 
\yi  cupfuls  flour  2  whites  of  eggs 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Y^  teaspoonful  salt 
y2  teaspoonful  almond  extract  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

Milk 

Sift  flour,  baking  powder,  salt  and  sugar  into  bowl.  Put  whites  of 
eggs  into  measuring  cup,  add  Crisco,  and  fill  cup  with  milk.  Add  to  dry 
mixture  with  extracts  and  beat  vigorously  six  minutes.  Pour  into  small 
Criscoed  and  floured  cake  tin  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  forty-five  minutes. 
Cake  may  be  frosted  if  liked. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  cake. 

126 


Cakts 


Grisco  Sponge  Cake 


3  eggs  \l4  cupfuls  flour 

1  cupful  sugar  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

}4  cupful  Crisco         '  j/i  teaspoonful  orange  extract 

yi  teaspoonful  salt  yi  cupful  cold  water 

Cream  Crisco;  add  salt,  yolks  of  eggs  well  beaten,  and  sugar,  and  beat 
for  five  minutes,  add  orange  extract  and  cold  water.  Beat  up  whites  of 
eggs  to  a  stiff  froth  and  add  alternately  with  the  flour  sifted  with  the 
baking  powder.  Divide  into  Criscoed  and  floured  gem  pans  and  bake  in 
a  moderate  oven  for  fifteen  minutes. 
Sufficient  for  twelve  cakes. 

Sand  Cake 

1  cupful  Crisco  5  eggs 

1  cupful  sugar  >^  lb.  cornstarch 

1  teaspoonful  salt  1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

Cream  the  Crisco  and  salt,  add  sugar  by  tablespoonfuls,  beating  all 
the  time,  then  add  the  yolks  of  the  eggs  each  one  separately,  then  add  the 
cornstarch  by  tablespoonfuls,  lemon  extract  and  lastly  whites  of  eggs 
beaten  to  a  stiff  froth.  Turn  into  a  papered  cake  tin  and  bake  in 
moderate  oven  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour.      Sufficient  for  one  cake. 

Lady  Baltimore  Cake 

(White  Cake) 

1  cupful  sugar  2}4  cupfuls  flour 

^  cupful  Crisco  1^2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

^  cupful  cold  water  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract  6  whites  of  eggs 

For  the  Filling 

1  cupful  sugar  Pinch  cream  of  tartar 

}4  cupful  boiling  water  yi  cupful  chopped  candied  cherriet 

2  whites  of  eggs  }4  cupful  chopped  candied 
1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract  pineapple 

For  cake.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together.  Sift  together  three 
times  dry  ingredients  and  add  alternately  with  water.  Add  vanilla,  beat 
mixture  well  then  fold  in  stiffly  beaten  whites  of  eggs.  Divide  into  two 
Criscoed  and  floured  layer  cake  tins  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  twenty- 
five  minutes. 

For  filling.  Put  sugar  and  water  into  saucepan,  stir  till  boiling,  add 
cream  of  tartar,  then  boil  until  it  forms  a  soft  ball  when  tried  in  cold  water, 
or  240^  F.;  pour  on  to  the  stiffly  beaten  whites  of  eggs,  pouring  in  a  steady 
stream  and  very  slowly,  adding  while  beating  vanilla,  cherries  and  pine- 
apple, beat  till  thick  and  divide  between  and  on  top  of  cake. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  layer  cake. 

Lemon  Layer  Cake 
For  Cake 

6  tablespoonfuls  sugar  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 
3  eggs                                                12  tablespoonfuls  flour 

Grated  rind  1  lemon 

127 


Cakes 

For  Lemon  Filling 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  4  yolks  of  eggs 

2  lemons  1  white  of  egg 

K  cupful  sugar  X  teaspoonful  salt 

For  cake.  Put  the  eggs,  sugar,  and  lemon  rind  into  basin,  stand  it 
over  pan  of  boiling  water,  and  beat  until  warm;  then  remove  from  hot 
water,  and  continue  beating  until  mixture  is  stiff  and  cold;  then  add  flour 
mixed  with  baking  powder  and  salt,  and  pass  through  sieve,  add  Crisco 
melted  but  cool,  taking  care  to  stir  very  gently,  but  on  no  account  beat  it. 
Divide  mixture  into  two  small  Criscoed  and  floured  layer  cake  tins,  and 
bake  ten  minutes  in  moderately  hot  oven.  Turn  out  and  cool,  then  put 
together  with  lemon  Riling. 

For  filling.  Beat  up  eggs  in  saucepan,  add  Crisco,  salt,  grated  rinds 
and  strained  lemon  juice.  Stir  with  wooden  spoon  over  gentle  heat  until 
mixture  just  comes  to  boiling  point.     When  cold  use. 

Sufficient  for  one  layer  cake. 

Lord  Baltimore  Cake 

1  cupful  sugar  2}4  cupfuls  flour 

^  cupful  Crisco  1}4  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

}4  cupful  cold  water  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract  6  yolks  of  eggs 

Filling  or  Frosting 

1  cupful  sugar  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 
}4  cupful  boiling  water                     l4  cupful  chopped  raisins 

2  whites  of  eggs  }4  cupful  chopped  nut  meats 
Pinch  cream  of  tartar  5  chopped  figs 

For  cake.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together.  Sift  together  three 
times  dry  ingredients  and  add  alternately  with  water.  Add  vanilla,  beat 
mixture  well,  then  fold  in  beaten  yolks  of  eggs.  Divide  into  two  Criscoed 
and  floured  layer  cake  tins  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  twenty-five  minutes. 

For  filling.  Put  sugar  and  water  into  saucepan,  stir  till  boiling,  add 
cream  of  tartar,  then  boil  until  it  forms  soft  ball  when  tried  in  cold  water, 
or  240°  F.;  pour  on  to  stiffly  beaten  whites  of  eggs,  pouring  in  steady 
stream  and  very  slowly,  adding  while  beating  vanilla,  raisins,  nuts,  and 
figs,  beat  until  thick  and  divide  between  and  on  top  of  cake. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  layer  cake. 

Lunch  Cakes 

1  scant  cupful  sugar  2  cupfuls  flour 

6  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

1  cupful  milk  1  teaspoonful  salt 

2  eggs  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 
Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  togetlier,  then  add  well  beaten  eggs.     Sift 

dry  ingredients,  and  add  to  first  mixture  alternately  with  milk.  Divide 
into  Criscoed  and  floured  gem  pans  and  bake  in  moderately  hot  oven 
fifteen  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  fifteen  cakes. 

128 


Cakes 


Jelly  Roll 


4  eggs  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

1  cupful  sugar  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         4  tablespoonfuls  milk 
2  cupfuls  flour  Jelly  or  preserves 

1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

Beat  eggs  and  sugar  together  twenty  minutes,  remove  beater,  sift 
in  flour,  salt,  and  baking  powder,  add  milk,  extract,  and  melted  Crisco. 
Grease  large  flat  tin  with  Crisco,  dust  over  with  flour,  pour  in  mixture  and 
spread  out  evenly.  Bake  twelve  minutes  in  moderately  hot  oven.  Turn 
out  on  sugared  paper,  spread  quickly  with  jelly  or  preserve  and  roll  up  at 
once.  The  cake  will  crack  if  spreading  and  rolling  are  not  quickly  done* 
Sliced  jelly  roll  is  delicious  with  custard. 

Sufficient  for  one  jelly  roll. 


Marble  Cake 

2  cupfuls  sugar  2  tablespoonfuls  melted 
1  cupful  Crisco  chocolate 

3}4  cupfuls  flour  1  teaspoonful  powdered 

4  eggs  cinnamon 

1  cupful  milk  ^2  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  5^  teaspoonful  powdered  allspice 

2  tablespoonfuls  molasses  1  teaspoonful  salt 

Cream  Crisco,  add  gradually  the  sugar,  yolks  of  eggs  beaten  until 
thick,  flour,  salt,  baking  powder,  milk,  and  egg  whites  beaten  to  stiff  froth. 
Mix  carefully  and  to  one-third  the  mixture  add  spices,  molasses,  and  melted 
chocolate.  Drop  in  Criscoed  cake  pan  alternately  a  spoonful  of  each  mix- 
ture, and  draw  spoon  through  once  or  twice  to  make  colors  lie  in  lines. 
Bake  in  moderately  hot  oven  one  hour. 

Sufficient  for  one  medium-sized  cake 


Marmalade  Cake 

}4  cupful  sugar  }4  teaspoonful  salt 
^2  cupful  Crisco  1  egg 

1  cupful  marmalade  2  cupfuls  flour 

ly4  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder  J^  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger 

Sift  salt,  flour,  and  baking  powder  into  basin,  rub  in  Crisco  with 
finger  tips,  add  ginger  and  egg  well  beaten.  Knead  lightly  to  smooth 
paste  and  divide  into  two  pieces.  Roll  out  pieces  and  line  Criscoed  dinner 
plate  with  one  of  them.  Spread  over  with  marmalade,  cover  with  remain- 
ing piece  of  paste,  pinch  neatly  round  the  edges  and  bake  in  moderate  oven 
half  an  hour.     Cut  like  pie  and  serve  hot  or  cold. 

Sufficient  for  eight  pieces. 

129 


Cakes 


Old  Fashioned  Seed  Cake 


2  cupfuls  sugar  1  teaspoonful  salt 

\yi  cupfuls  Crisco  2  tablespoonfuls  carraway  seeds 

4  cupfuls  flour  12  eggs 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  thoroughly  together,  then  drop  in  eggs  one 
by  one,  beating  each  one  in  well  before  next  is  added,  sift  in  flour  and 
salt,  add  carraway  seeds.  Turn  into  Criscoed  and  papered  loaf  tin  and 
bake  in  moderately  hot  oven  one  and  a  half  hours. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  cake. 

Almond  and  Citron  Cake 

1  cupful  sugar  2  cupfuls  flour 

1  cupful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

5  eggs  i^  wineglass  brandy 

}4  lb.  blanched  chopped  almonds     X  teaspoonful  powdered  mace 
}4  lb.  shredded  candied  citron  peel     1  teaspoonful  salt 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  thoroughly  together,  beat  in  yolks  of  eggs  one 
by  one,  add  almonds,  citron,  brandy,  mace,  flour,  baking  powder,  salt, 
mix  well  and  fold  in  whites  of  eggs  beaten  to  a  stifl'"  froth.  Turn  into  a 
papered  cake  pan  and  bake  in  a  moderate  oven  for  one  hour.  Cover  with 
boiled  frosting  if  liked. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  cake. 

Walnut  Cakes 
For  Cakes 

1  cupful  sugar  2  cupfuls  flour 

J/^  cupful  Crisco  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

1  cupful  milk  or  water  1  whole  egg  and  2  yolks  of  eggs 

}4  teaspoonful  salt  1  cupful  chopped  walnut  meats 

1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

For  Frosting 

1  cupful  sugar  Pinch    cream  of  tartar 

1  cupful  water  1  teaspoonful  lemon  juice 

2  whites  of  eggs  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

For  cakes.  Creanri  Crisco  and  sugar  thoroughly  together,  add  eggs 
well  beaten,  salt,  vanilla,  milk  or  water,  baking  powder,  flour,  and  nuts. 
Mix  well  and  divide  into  Criscoed  and  floured  gem  pans  and  bake  ten  min- 
utes in  moderate  oven.    When  cold  cover  with  boiled  frosting. 

For  frosting.  Dissolve  sugar  and  water  over  fire  in  a  saucepan,  add 
cream  of  tartar  and  boil  until  it  forms  a  soft  ball  when  tried  in  cold  water, 
or  240°  F.  Pour  on  to  the  beaten  whites  of  eggs,  pouring  in  a  steady  stream 
and  very  slowly,  adding,  while  beating,  lemon  juice,  and  vanilla;  beat 
until  thick,  and  use. 

Sufficient  for  fifteen  cakes. 

130 


Cakes 


Rose  Leaf  Cakes 


1  cupful  rose  leaves  3  eggs 

3  cupfuls  flour  1  cupful  milk 

1  cupful  sugar  2  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

3^  cupful  Crisco  1  lemon 

}4  teaspoonful  salt 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  thoroughly  together,  then  add  eggs  well 
beaten,  flour,  baking  powder,  salt,  milk,  grated  rind  and  1  tablespoonful 
lemon  juice,  and  fresh  rose  leaves.  Divide  into  Criscoed  and  floured  gem 
pans  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  from  twelve  to  fifteen  minutes. 

Sufl&cient  for  thirty-five  cakes. 

Scotch  Shortbread 

4  cupfuls  flour  1  cupful  Crisco 

^  cupful  sugar  1  large  egg 

1  teaspoonful  salt 

Sift  flour  and  salt  on  to  baking  board.  Cream  Crisco,  sugar  and  egg  in 
basin  and  when  thoroughly  beaten  turn  out  on  board  and  very  gradually 
knead  in  flour.  Make  into  two  smooth  rounds,  pinch  them  round  the  edges, 
prick  over  top  with  fork,  lay  on  papered  tin  and  bake  in  moderate  oven 
thirty-five  minutes.     Leave  on  tin  until  cold. 

Sufficient  for  two  round  cakes. 

Silver  Nut  Cake 

1  cupful  sugar  >^  teaspoonful  salt 

^  cupful  Crisco  3  teaspoonfuls  baking  powder 

4  whites  of  eggs  1  cupful  chopped  pecans  or 

yi  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract  English  walnut  meats 

2  cupfuls  flour  )4  cupful  milk 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar.  Sift  dry  ingredients  and  add  to  Crisco  mix- 
ture, alternating  with  the  milk;  add  nuts  and  vanilla  extract.  Beat  egg 
whites  to  stiff  froth  and  fold  in  at  last.  Turn  into  Criscoed  and  floured 
cake  tin  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  thirty-five  minutes. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  cake. 

Simnel  Cake 

^  cupful  sugar  }4  cupful  chopped  candied 

^  cupful  Crisco  citron  peel 

4  eggs  2  cupfuls  flour 

2  cupfuls  sultana  raisins  1  teaspoonful  baking  powder 

^  cupful  seeded  raisins  }4  teaspoonful  almond  extract 

^  teaspoonful  salt 

For  Filling  and  Icing 

}i  lb.  ground  almonds  2  eggs 

2  cupfuls  powdered  sugar  1  teaspoonful  almond  extract 

Fo^ake.  Cream  Crisco  and  sugar  together,  add  eggs  well  beaten, 
flour,  baking  powder,  salt,  almond  extract,  raisins,  and  peel.    Make  filling 

131 


JIakfs 

by  mixing  almonds  with  powdered  sugar,  eggs  well  beaten  and  almond 
extract.  Line  Criscoed  cake  tin  with  paper  and  place  in  hflf  of  cake  mix- 
ture, then  put  in  layer  of  filling,  then  remaining  half  of  cake  mixture.  Bake 
in  moderate  oven.  When  cake  is  nearly  baked,  place  remaining  almond 
paste  on  top  and  finish  baking.  Cake  takes  from  one  hour  to  one  and  a 
quarter  hours. 

Sufficient  for  medium-sized  cake. 

Southern  Fruit  Cake 

1  cupful  sugar  3  eggs 

1  cupful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  powdered 

1  cupful  molasses  cinnamon 

^  cupful  sour  cream  1  cupful  seeded  raisins 

3  cupfuls  flour         •  yi  cupful  currants 

1  teaspoonful  salt  }4  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

J^  teaspoonful  baking  soda  }4  teaspoonful  powdered  cloves 

}4  teaspoonful  powdered  allspice 
Cream   Crisco   and   sugar   thoroughly   together,   then   add    molasses, 
cream,  flour,  soda,  eggs  well  beaten,  salt,  spices,  and  fruit.     Mix  well  and 
turn  into  Criscoed  and  papered  cake  tin  and  bake  in  slow  oven  one  and  a 
half  hours. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  cake. 

The  Wholesome  Parkin 

1  cupful  flour  1  egg 

yi  cupful  melted  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger 

2  cupfuls  fine  oatmeal  }4  teaspoonful  powdered  allspice 
J^  cupful  molasses  }4  teaspoonful  powdered 

3  tablespoonfuls  sugar  cinnamon 

}4  teaspoonful  salt  ^  teaspoonful  baking  soda 

Melt  Crisco  and  mix  with  molasses,  then  add  sugar,  egg  well  beaten, 
salt,  soda,  spices,  flour,  and  oatmeal.  Mix  and  pour  into  small  square 
Criscoed  tin  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  thirty-five  minutes.  This  little 
cake  is  excellent  when  a  week  old. 

Sufficient  for  one  small  cake. 

Whole  Wheat  Gingerbread 

4  tablespoonfuls  sugar  }4  cupful  seeded  raisins 
^  cupful  Crisco  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

2  eggs  ly^  cupfuls  molasses 

1  teaspoonful  baking  soda  )4  cupful  chopped  nut  meats 
yi  cupful  milk  1  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger 

2  cupfuls  flour  yi  teaspoonful  powdered  mace 

2  cupfuls  whole  wheat  flour  1  teaspoonful  powdered  cinnamon 

3  tablespoonfuls  chopped  candied  lemon  peel 

Mix  flours,  then  add  peel,  raisins,  nuts,  spices,  and  salt.  Melt  Crisco, 
molasses,  and  sugar,  then  cool,  and  add  them  with  eggs  well  beaten,  with, 
soda  mixed  with  milk.  Mix  well  and  turn  into  Criscoed  and  floured  c^ke 
tin.     Bake  in  moderate  ovea  one  hour.  ^^ 

Sufficient  for  one  large  cake  of  gingerbread. 

132 


VI1©II¥AKIIAM 


E' 


'VEN  those  who  are  by  no  means 
decided  vegetarians  may  be  glad  to 
pass  over  a  dinner  occasionally  with- 
out meat.  It  is  perhaps  not  too  much  to  say  that  every 
housekeeper  ought  to  be  able  to  provide  a  meal  without  the 
aid  of  meat.  We  do  not  mean  by  this  simply  the  cooking  of 
vegetables  or  the  preparations  of  puddings,  but  the  presenta- 
tion of  dishes  intended  to  take  the  place  of  flesh,  such  as 
soups  and  broths  made  without  meat,  vegetable  stews,  lentil 
fritters  and  other  healthful  and  nutritious  dishes.  A  vegetarian 
menu  is  not  so  simple  as  it  sounds.  It  requires  knowledge 
and  discrimination  on  the  housekeeper's  part  to  serve  a  solid 
meal  without  flesh  or  fowl. 

Now  that  meat  is  so  dear  it  is  the  favorable  moment  to 
try  a  vegetable  diet  for  a  time.  One  mistake  to  be  avoided 
in  this  catering  is  the  putting  down  of  too  many  dishes  of  a 
pulpy  character — food  which  is  soft  is  excellent  with  other 
things,  but  alone  it  is  neither  satisfying  nor  very  nourishing, 
at  least  to  a  person  of  strong  digestion.  All  of  them  should 
not  be  white,  for  instance,  and  the  same  rule  holds  good  in 
other  things  besides  color.  A  nice  dish  for  this  kind  of  diet 
is  a  vegetable  curry,  in  which  all  the  vegetables  ?re  treated 
like  meat  and  turned  out  crisp;  all  the  vegetables,  too,  must 
be  fresh  and  young  for  this  method  of  serving,  so  that  any- 
thing like  stringiness  is  absolutely  impossible. 

Crisco  is  entirely  vegetable. 

Bean  Cutlets 


2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco 
1  tablespoonful  flour 
J^  cupful  bean  liquor 

Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Soak  beans  in  water  twenty-four  hours, 
then  boil  for  several  hours  till  quite  tender, 
drain  them,  preserving  liquor,  chop  them 


2  eggs 
%  lb.  dried  beans 

A  few  cooked  mixed  vegetables 
Breadcrumbs 


Fegetarian 

very  fine;  blend  Crisco  with  flour  in  saucepan  over  fire,  add  bean  liquor, 
beans,  salt  and  pepper,  and  yolks  of  eggs;  turn  out  on  to  a  dish  and  set 
aside  till  cold.  Then  cut  out  with  cutlet-cutter  or  shape  with  knife;  dip 
in  beaten  whites  of  the  eggs,  then  in  fine  breadcrumbs,  repeat  a  second 
time,  and  fry  in  hot  Crisco.  Serve  on  hot  platter  decorated  with  a  few 
hot  cooked  mixed  vegetables.     Sufficient  for  eight  cutlets. 

Devilled  Bananas 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  8  bananas 

}4  teaspoonful  salt  1  teaspoonful  chopped  pickles 

Few  grains  red  pepper,  or  1  dessertspoonful  chopped  chillies 

Slice  bananas,  mix  with  salt,  chopped  pickles  and  red  pepper  or  chop- 
ped chillies  and  put  them  into  hot  Crisco.  Cook  for  four  minutes  and 
serve.     Sufficient  for  eight  bananas. 

Cauliflower  Snow 

2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco         4  poached  eggs 

2  cauliflowers  Salt  and  paprika  to  taste 

Toasted  bread 

Boil  cauliflowers  in  salted  water  till  tender,  then  drain  and  set  near 
fire  till  quite  dry.  Remove  all  green  parts  and  press  flower  through  a 
potato  ricer  upon  a  hot  dish,  on  which  they  are  to  be  served.  In  no  way 
crush  the  mass  as  it  falls  from  the  ricer.  Sprinkle  over  with  melted  Crisco. 
Surround  dish  with  poached  eggs,  each  laid  upon  square  of  toasted  but- 
ered  bread.    Dust  each  egg  with  salt  and  a  little  paprika.    Serve  very  hot. 

Craigie  Toast 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

4  eggs  ^2  cupful  milk 
4  tomatoes  Toast 

1  teaspoonful  chopped  gherkin  or  capers 

Skin,  seed  and  chop  tomatoes,  add  eggs  well  beaten,  gherkin,  milk, 
salt  and  pepper.  Melt  Crisco,  add  other  ingredients  and  stir  over  fire 
till  thoroughly  hot.  Serve  at  once  on  toast.  The  mixture  may  also  be 
baked  in  oven  twenty  minutes  and  then  garnished  with  small  pieces  of 
toast.     Sufficient  for  four  pieces  of  toast. 

Excellent  Lemon  Mincemeat 

}4  cupful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  powdered  cinnamon 

2  large  lemons  1  teaspoonful  powdered  ginger 

4  apples  }/i  teaspoonful  grated  nutmeg 

X  lb.  chopped  candied  lemon  }4  teaspoonful  powdered  allspice 

peel  }4  teaspoonful  powdered  cloves 
1  lb.  currants  1  teaspoonful  salt 

1^  cupfuls  sugar  )4  cupful  seeded  raisins 
}4  cupful  chopped  nut  meats 

Extract  juice  from  lemons  and  remove  pips.  Now  put  lemons  into 
saucepan,  cover  with  cold  water,  and  boil  until  lemon  feels  quite  tender. 

134 


iFegetarian 

Change  water  at  least  twice,  drain  and  pound  peel  to  a  paste,  add  apples, 
cored,   peeled   and   chopped,   lemon   peel,   Crisco,   currants,   raisins,   salt, 
spices,  lemon  juice,  nut  meats,  and  sugar.     Put  into  a  jar  and  cover.    This 
mincemeat  is  excellent  for  pies  and  tartlets. 
Sufficient  for  four  pies. 

Dominion  Tart 

For  Pastry 

6  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  }4  teaspoonful  mixed  spices 

^  cupful  flour  %  teaspoonful  salt 

yi  cupful  potato  flour  1  teaspoonful  lemon  juice 

1  tablespoonful  sugar  Cold  water 

For  Mixture 

3  apples  }4  lemon 

f^  cupful  prunes  K  cupful  water 

4  tablespoonfuls  sugar  1  tablespoonful  cakecrumbs 

For  mixture,  peel,  core  and  slice  apples,  and  wash  prunes  in  lukewarm 
water.  Put  these  into  a  small  saucepan  with  sugar,-  grated  lemqn  rind  and 
cold  water.  Stew  slowly  until  apples  are  soft.  Then  remove  prunes,  and 
take  out  stones.  Cut  prunes  in  small  pieces  and  return  them  to  apples  and 
cool.  For  pastry,  sift  flours,  sugar,  salt,  and  spices  into  basin.  Add 
Crisco  and  cut  it  into  flour  with  knife  until  finely  divided.  Then  rub  to- 
gether lightly  with  finger  tips  until  as  fine  as  breadcrumbs.  While  rub- 
bing, keep  lifting  flour  well  up  in  basin  so  that  air  may  mix  with  it  and 
Crisco  is  not  made  too  soft.  Add  lemon  juice  and  sufficient  water  to  make 
stiflF  paste.*  Divide  into  two  equal  pieces.  Wet  a  dinner  plate  with  cold 
water  and  leave  it  wet.  Roll  out  one  of  the  pieces  rather  thinly,  and  line 
plate  with  it.  Sprinkle  cakecrumbs  over  it,  then  spread  on  mixture.  Roll 
out  the  other  piece  of  pastry  for  a  cover.  Wet  round  the  edge  of  the  pastry; 
lay  other  piece  of  pastry  on,  and  press  edges  well  together.  Trim  round 
with  knife  or  scissors,  and  mark  neatly  round  the  edges.  Brush  over  top 
with  a  little  water  or  beaten  white  of  egg.  Dredge  with  sugar,  and  bake 
in  moderate  oven  forty-five  minutes.  Serve  hot  or  cold.  The  tart  may 
be  covered  with  boiled  frosting. 

Marchette  Croquettes 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 
4  tablespoonfuls  cooked                    2  hard-cooked  eggs 

spinach  1  raw  egg 

3  small  cooked  potatoes  Breadcrumbs 

1  tablespoonful  chopped  onion  Crisco  flake  pastry 

Rub  spinach  and  potatoes  through  wire  sieve;  fry  onion  in  Crisco, 
add  spinach  and  potatoes,  season  with  salt  and  pepper,  fry  a  few  minutes, 
then  set  aside  till  cold.  Roll  out  pastry,  cut  out  some  small  rounds,  then 
place  spoonful  of  vegetable  mixture  on  half  the  number  of  pastry  rounds, 
place  slice  of  hard-cooked  egg  on  each,  brush  round  edges  with  beaten 
egg,  press  other  round  on  this,  dip  in  egg  and  breadcrumbs  and  fry  in  hot 
Crisco.     Serve  hot.     Sufficient  for  six  croquettes. 

135 


Vegetarian 

Mixed  Vegetable  Souffle 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  yi  lb.  stewed  onions 

yi  lb.  cooked  carrots  1  tablespoonful  chopped 

yi  lb.  boiled  potatoes  parsley 

f^  lb.  boiled  turnips  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 
3  eggs 

Chop  onions,  add  vegetables  mashed,  then  mix  well,  add  Crisco, 
seasonings,  and  yolks  of  eggs.  Beat  up  whites  of  eggs  to  stiff  froth  and  fold 
them  into  mixture,  then  turn  it  into  Criscoed  fireproof  dish  and  bake  thirty 
minutes  in  moderate  oven. 

Nut  and  Macaroni  Savory 

4  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  3  cupfuls  milk 

yi  lb.  chopped  Brazil  nuts  2  tablespoonfuls  chopped 

1  cupful  boiled  macaroni  parsley 

\yi  cupfuls  breadcrumbs  Salt,  pepper,  and  powdered 

2  eggs  mace  to  taste 

Brown  sauce 

Cut  macaroni  into  small  pieces  and  put  into  bowl,  add  nuts,  bread- 
crumbs, seasonings,  eggs  well  beaten,  and  milk;  turn  into  well  greased 
earthenware  dish,  dot  with  tiny  pieces  of  Crisco  and  bake  in  moderate 
oven  forty-five  minutes.    Serve  hot  with  brown  sauce. 

Potato  and  Nut  Croquettes 

2  tablespoonfuls  melted  Crisco  Few  drops  onion  juice 

2  cupfuls  riced  potatoes  1  egg  and  1  yolk  of  egg 

1  tablespoonful  milk  y^  cupful  chopped  nut  meats 

Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper  yi  cupful  cream 

to  taste  yi  cupful  breadcrumbs 

Mix  potatoes  with  Crisco,  milk,  yolk  of  egg,  onion  juice  and  season- 
ings, and  mix  well.  Put  cream  and  breadcrumbs  into  small  saucepan  and 
stir  to  thick  paste,  then  cool;  now  add  nuts,  salt  and  pepper  to  taste  and 
half  yolk  of  egg.  Inclose  some  of  nut  mixture  in  potato  mixture,  making 
ingredients  into  neat  croquettes.  Beat  up  remainder  of  egg  with  table- 
spoonful of  water.  Roll  croquettes  in  fine  breadcrumbs,  brush  over  with 
egg,  and  again  roll  in  crumbs.  Fry  in  hot  Crisco  to  golden  brown,  then 
drain.  Crisco  should  be  heated  until  a  crumb  of  bread  becomes  a  golden 
brown  in  forty  seconds.    Serve  hot  decorated  with  parsley. 

Sufficient  for  eight  croquettes. 

Potato  Sausage 

yi  cupful  Crisco  yi  lb.  breadcrumbs 

K  lb.  chopped  onions  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

yi  lb.  cold  boiled  mashed  potatoes        2  beaten  eggs 

Mix  all  ingredients  thoroughly  well  together  with  wooden  spoon, 
then  form  into  sausages;  tie  each  well  in  cloth,  and  boil  exactly  as  a  roly- 

136 


Fegetarian 

poly.     If  not  to  be  eaten  when  newly  cooked,  put  aside,  and  untie  when 
wanted      This  sausage  is  also  good  if  oatmeal  is  added  instead  of  bread- 
crumbs, or  it  may  be  made  half  oatmeal  and  half  breadcrumbs. 
Sufficient  for  twelve  sausages. 

Potatoes  Sefton 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  1  yollc  of  egg 

3  baked  potatoes  1  tablespoonful  cream 
Salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper  Chopped  parsley 

to  taste  Watercress 

Split  potatoes  in  halves  lengthways.  Scoop  out  centers,  rub  them 
through  a  sieve,  add  seasonings,  melted  Crisco,  yolk  of  egg,  and  cream. 
Beat  well  till  light,  then  put  mixtur,e  into  forcing  bag  with  tube,  force  into 
potato  cases  which  should  be  dried.  Heat  in  moderate  oven.  Sprinkle  a 
little  chopped  parsley  on  top  and  serve  decorated  with  watercress. 

Sufficient  for  three  potatoes. 

Rice  a  la  Maigre 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  raw  egg 

1  grated  shallot  1  cupful  thick  tomato  sauce 

5^  cupful  boiled  rice  Salt,  pepper,  and  paprika  to 

4  chopped  hard-cooked  eggs  taste 

1  tablespoonful  white  sauce  3  baked  tomatoes 

1  tablespoonful  chopped  parsley 

Fry  shallot  in  Crisco,  then  add  rice,  two  of  the  hard-cooked  eggs, 
white  sauce,  raw  yolk  of  egg,  and  seasonings.  Stir  over  fire  till  very  hot, 
then  turn  out  on  to  hot  dish;  pour  over  tomato  sauce,  sprinkle  with 
parsley  and  garnish  with  remainder  of  eggs,  and  baked  tomatoes. 

Rhubarb  Pudding 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  J4  cupful  flour 

4  tablespoonfuls  sugar  1  cupful  stewed  rhubarb 

2  eggs  yi  teaspoonful  salt 

1  lemon  Few  breadcrumbs 

Crisco  a  pudding  dish  and  dust  it  over  with  breadcrumbs.  Put  layer 
of  breadcrumbs  at  bottom,  then  spread  in  rhubarb.  Beat  Crisco  and  sugar 
till  creamy,  beat  in  yolks  of  eggs,  add  grated  rind  of  lemon,  sift  in  flour 
and  salt.  Spread  this  mixture  over  rhubarb  and  bake  in  moderate  oven 
twenty  minutes.  Beat  up  whites  of  eggs  to  stifle  froth,  add  one  tablespoon- 
ful of  sifted  sugar  and  half  teaspoonful  lemon  juice.  Drop  in  spoonfuls  on 
top  of  pudding  and  return  to  oven  to  brown  lightly. 

Spanish  Rice 

}4  cupful  Crisco  5  small  onions 

}4  cupful  grated  cheese  1  cupful  hot  water 
6  tablespoonfuls  rice  Salt  and  red  pepper  to  taste 

1  can  tomatoes  }4  cupful  chopped  olives 

Wash  rice  and  put  it  in  bowl,  add  Crisco,  seasonings,  cheese,  hot 
water,  tomatoes,  olives,  and  onions  cut  in  small  pieces.  Turn  into  a  Cris- 
coed  fireproof  dish  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  one  hour,  or  until  rice  is 
tender. 

1?7 


Fegetarian 

Timbale  Molds 

1  teaspoonful  melted  Crisco  1  egg 

}i  cupful  flour  y^  teaspoonful  salt 

}4  cupful  milk 

Sift  flour  and  salt  into  bowl,  add  egg  well  beaten,  milk  and  Crisco. 
Beat  five  minutes  then  strain  into  cup.  Have  kettle  of  Crisco  on  fire  and 
heat  until  cube  of  bread  will  become  golden  brown  in  sixty  seconds.  Heat 
timbale  iron  in  hot  Crisco,  let  stand  two  or  three  minutes,  then  drain  and 
dip  into  batter  to  half  inch  of  top  of  iron;  submerge  in  Crisco  and  fry 
until  batter  is  crisp  and  lightly  browned.  Remove  from  iron  and  drain 
on  paper.  If  batter  does  not  cling  to  iron,  then  iron  is  not  hot  enough.  If 
Crisco  sizzles  considerably,  and  batter  case  spreads  out  and  drops  from  the 
iron,  mold  is  too  hot.  If  iron  is  lowered  too  far  into  batter  the  case  will 
come  over  top  of  iron  and  be  diflicult  to  remove.  Creamed  dishes  of  ah 
kinds  can  be  served  in  these  cases.  Cold  custards,  cooked  vegetables, 
fruits  or  ices  may  be  also  served  in  the  cases. 

Sufficient  for  forty  caies. 

Vegetable  Pie 

}4  cupful  melted  Crisco  1  cupful  sliced  beans 

6  potatoes  2  onions 

2  carrots  4  tomatoes 

1  parsnip  Pepper  and  salt  to  taste 

^  head  celery  Sufficient  white  vegetable 

1  cupful  peas  stock  to  cover 

1  teaspoonful  powdered  herbs 

Peel  and  slice  potatoes  and  partly  boil  them.  Then  prepare  parsnip, 
carrots,  celery  and  onions,  and  cook  them  for  fifteen  minutes.  Grease 
large  fireproof  dish  and  place  in  all  vegetables  in  layers,  with  herbs,  Crisco, 
salt  and  pepper  to  taste.  Pour  in  white  stock,  cover  with  layer  of  sliced 
potatoes  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  for  one  and  a  half  hours. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  savory  pie. 


138 


mQQiS 


HEN  there  is  any  doubt  as  to  the 
freshness  of  eggs,  they  may  be  tested 
in  various  ways.  Quite  fresh  eggs  will 
sink  in  a  strong  brine,  and  as  they 
become  stale  they  remain  suspended  at  different  depths  in 
the  brine,  until  an  absolutely  stale  egg  will  float.  Successful 
preservation  depends  in  a  great  measure  upon  the  condition 
of  the  egg  at  the  time  of  preserving.  Different  methods  of 
preserving  all  aim  at  the  same  thing,  namely,  at  coating  the 
porous  shell  with  some  substance  which  will  prevent  the  air 
entering  and  setting  up  decomposition.     See  page  30. 

When  used  as  food,  eggs  should  be  cooked  at  a  low 
temperature — about  160°  F.,  or  if  in  the  shell  at  about  180°  F. 
The  time  varies  with  the  size  of  the  egg,  from  two  and  a  half 
minutes  for  poaching  a  medium-sized  egg  to  four  and  a  half 
minutes  for  boiling  a  large  one.  If  too  much  cooked,  or  at  too 
high  a  temperature,  the  white  becomes  tough,  hard,  and  to 
many  people,  indigestible. 

When  required  for  salads,  garnishing,  etc.,  the  eggs  must 
be  boiled  from  ten  to  twenty  minutes,  and  if  the  yolks  are  to  be 
powdered  for  sprinkling,  they  must  be  cooked  for  a  longer  time, 
or  the  centers  will  be  somewhat  tough  and  elastic,  and  useless 
for  the  purpose. 

In  beating  eggs,  a  little  salt  added  to  the  whites  helps 
to  bring  them  to  a  froth  more  quickly.  When  frothed  whites 
are  to  be  mixed  with  a  heavier  or  more  solid  substance,  great 
care  must  be  taken  not  to  break  down  the  froth.  The  object 
of  beating  being  to  mix  in  air,  rough  handling  afterwards 
would  render  the  beating  useless;  the  mixing  must  therefore 
be  done  very  carefully.  They  should  be  folded  or  wrapped 
up  in  the  other  substance,  but  the  mixing  also  must  be  thor- 
ough, for  any  pieces  of  white  separated  from  the  rest  will 
toughen  and  taste  leathery,  besides  failing  in  the  special 
purpose  of  giving  lightness  to  the  mixture.  After  mixing 
lightly  and  perfectly  all  such  preparations 


139 


Eggs 

should  be  cooked  at  once.  The  white  "speck"  always  should 
be  removed  from  a  broken  egg,  as  it  is  easily  distmguished 
after  cooking,  and  in  anything  of  a  liquid  nature,  such  as 
custards,  sauces,  etc.,  it  would  be  hard  and  unpleasant. 


Baked  Omelet 

1  tablespoonfui  melted  Crisco       }4  teaspoonful  cornstarch 
4  eggs  2  tablespoonfuls  water 

8  tablespoonfuls  milk  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

t3eat  eggs  well,  add  milk  and  beat  again,  add  Crisco,  seasonings,  and 
cornstarch  mixed  with  water.  Turn  into  a  Criscoed  fireproof  dish  and  bake 
in  moderate  oven  fifteen  minutes.     Serve  hot. 


Creole  Eggs 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  bay  leaf 

2  tablespoonfuls  flour  1  blade  mace 

8  hard-cooked  eggs  2  cloves 

2  cupfuls  tomato  pulp  2  tablespoonfuls  chopped  parsley 
Salt,  pepper,  and  paprika  Pinch  of  powdered  thyme 

to  taste  Slices  of  cooked  ham 

1  small  chopped  onion  Breadcrumbs 

Fry  onion,  pepper,  and  parsley  in  Crisco  till  tender;  add  cloves,  thyme, 
bay  leaf,  and  mace,  cook  three  minutes,  then  stir  in  flour,  and  tomato  pulp. 
Let  mixture  boil  stirring  all  the  time  then  strain.  Quarter  the  hard-cooked 
eggs.  Put  layer  of  tomato  sauce  in  Criscoed  baking  dish,  then  layer  of 
ham,  then  eggs  sprinkled  with  salt,  pepper,  and  paprika,  then  sauce,  ham, 
and  eggs,  last  layer  being  sauce.  Cover  with  breadcrumbs,  dot  with  Crisco 
and  bake  ten  minutes  in  moderate  oven. 


Curried  Eggs 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  4  chopped  butternuts,  or  6 

6  hard-cooked  eggs  chopped  almonds 

1  small  chopped  onion  3  tablespoonfuls  cornstarch 

1  chopped  sour  apple  2  cupfuls  milk 

2  teaspoonfuls  curry  powder  }4  teaspoonful  salt 
1  lemon  Croutons 

Boil  eggs  till  hard,  peel  and  place  in  cold  water  until  required.  Fry 
onion  in  Crisco  a  few  minutes,  add  curry  powder,  apple,  nuts,  and  corn- 
starch moistened  with  milk.  Simmer  fifteen  minutes.  Stir  from  time  to 
time.  If  too  thick  add  a  little  white  stock  or  water.  Cut  eggs  in  halves, 
and  lay  them  in  the  sauce  with  the  salt  to  get  thoroughly  hot  through. 
Put  eggs  into  deep  hot  dish,  strain  sauce  over  them,  garnish  with  croutons 
and  lemon  slices. 

140 


Etzs 


Egg  Croquettes 


2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  yi  cupful  chopped  coolced 

2  tablespoonfuls  flour  tongue  or  ham 

}i  cupful  milk  Salt,  pepper,  and  grated 

6  hard-cooked  eggs  nutmeg  to  taste 

1  teaspoonful  chopped  parsley        1  egg 
Breadcrumbs 

Chop  eggs  and  mix  them  with  ham,  parsley,  and  seasonings.  Melt 
Crisco,  stir  in  flour,  then  add  the  milk  and  boil  three  minutes  stirring  all 
the  time.  Now  add  egg  mixture  and  if  required  add  more  seasoning.  Cool 
mixture  then  divide  it  into  nine  portions  and  make  each  into  a  neat  cro- 
quette; brush  over  with  the  egg  beaten  with  a  tablespoonful  of  water, 
roll  in  breadcrumbs  and  fry  in  hot  Crisco.  Drain  and  garnish  with  fried 
parsley.  Crisco  should  be  hot  enough  to  brown  breadcrumb  in  forty 
seconds. 

Sufficient  for  nine  croquettes. 

Eggs  with  Cucumber 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  yi  cupful  stock 

3  eggs  1  tablespoonful  tomato  pulp 
1  large  cucumber  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

1  cupful  tomato  sauce 

Peel  cucumber,  cut  off  ends  and  divide  rest  into  two- inch  pieces. 
Remove  center  portion  of  each  with  a  cutter  or  small  spoon.  Place  them 
in  a  Criscoed  pan  with  stock;  cover  with  greased  paper  and  cook  in  oven 
till  just  tender.  Great  care  must  be  taken  so  as  not  to  break  the  shapes. 
Break  eggs  into  saucepan,  add  Crisco  and  tomato  pulp;  season  nicely 
and  stir  over  fire  until  creamy  and  just  set.  Place  cucumbers  on  hot 
platter  and  fill  cavities  with  eggs.  Cover  with  thick  tomato  sauce,  and 
serve  hot. 

Sufficient  for  five  pieces. 

Eggs  with  Tomatoes 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  2  tablespoonfuls  cream 

4  even-sized  tomatoes  1  tablespoonful  chopped 
8  rounds  buttered  toast  pimiento 

3  eggs  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

Parsley 

Select  ripe  tomatoes  but  do  not  have  them  too  large;  remove  stems 
and  cut  each  in  halves  crossways;  remove  cores  and  pips,  and  fry  lightly 
in  two  tablespoonfuls  Crisco.  Have  rounds  of  buttered  toast  a  little  larger 
than  tomatoes.  Beat  eggs  in  small  saucepan,  add  cream,  pimientos,  rest 
of  Crisco,  seasonings,  and  stir  over  fire  until  creamy  and  just  setting.  Place 
each  half  tomato  on  round  of  toast,  divide  egg  mixture  into  tomatoes, 
garnish  with  parsley  and  serve  hot. 

141 


Eggs 

Savory  Eggs 

Crisco  Salt  and  pepper  to  taste 

6  eggs  2  tablespoonfuis  chopped 

4  tablespoonfuis  chopped  cooked  parsley 

chicken,  ham  or  tongue  6  rounds  fried  toast 

Crisco  six  small  molds.  Mix  ham,  parsley,  and  seasonings  together, 
throw  a  little  into  each  mold,  shake  it  well  round  sides;  break  into  each 
mold  one  egg,  taking  care  not  to  break  yolk,  sprinkle  with  salt  and  pepper, 
and  dot  with  Crisco.  Steam  four  or  five  minutes,  or  until  set.  Turn  out 
on  rounds  of  fried  toast  and  serve  at  once. 


142 


T  is  well  to  have  a  confectioner's  ther- 
mometer for  candy  making,  so  that  the 
syrup  may  be  removed  from  the  fire 
at  exactly  the  right  degree.  Such  ther- 
mometers are  made  of  wood,  brass,  or  copper,  and  the  degrees 
on  them  should  mark  not  less  than  350°.  A  thermometer 
always  should  be  gently  lowered  into  the  boiling  sugar.  When 
not  m  use,  it  should  be  kept  hanging  on  a  nail  or  hook. 
When  required  for  candy  making,  place  thermometer  in  pitcher 
of  warm  water,  so  that  it  may  nse  gradually,  and  return  it 
to  the  warm  water  on  removing  it  from  the  hot  candy.  This 
dissolves  the  clinging  candy  and  protects  the  tube  from  break- 
ing. The  wooden  thermometer  can  be  used  to  stir  with,  and 
is  very  easy  to  keep  clean. 

If  there  is  no  thermometer  handy  it  is  better  to  make  a 
list  of  the  various  stages  in  sugar  boiling,  and  learn  how  to 
test  the  sugar.  First  there  is  the  "thread"  (216°  F.  to  218°  F.) 
This  is  reached  when,  on  dipping  the  finger  and  thumb  first 
into  cold  water  and  then  into  the  syrup,  you  can  draw  them 
apart,  and  an  unbroken  thread  is  formed,  which  gradually  can 
be  drawn  wider  apart  on  further  testing  as  the  degree  of 
boiling  is  completed. 

The  next  is  the  "pearl"  (220°  F.)  To  see  if  the  syrup 
has  reached  this  stage,  after  the  sugar  has  dissolved  let  it 
boil  for  eight  to  ten  minutes,  then  dip  a  wooden  skewer  into 
the  syrup  to  obtain  a  drop  of  it.  Dip  the  finger  and  thumb 
into  cold  water,  then  rub  the  drop  of  syrup  between  them; 
if  it  feels  smooth,  the  syrup  has  reached  the  desired  stage.  The 
next  is  the  "blow"  (230°  F.)  Dip  a  spoon  into  the  sugar, 
shake  it,  and  blow  through  the  holes;  if  sparks  of  Hght  or 
bubbles  be  seen,  you  may  be  sure  of  the  blow.  This  is  fol- 
lowed by  the  "feather"  (235°  F.)  To  test  this,  dip  a  spoon 
into  the  boiling  syrup,  and  when  it  may  be  blown  easily  from 
the  spoon  in  long  shreds  it  has  reached  the  right  degree 


Candies 

Next  comes  the  '*  ball"  (240''  F.  to  250°  F.)  Dip  the  finger 
and  thumb  first  into  cold  water,  and  then  into  the  syrup,  the 
latter  then  can  be  rolled  into  a  soft  ball  between  the  finger 
and  thumb.  A  little  longer  boiling  gives  the  hard  ball.  This 
in  turn  is  succeeded  by  the  "crack"  (290°  F.to  300°  F.)  To 
test  this,  drop  a  little  of  the  syrup  into  cold  water;  if  it  then 
breaks  ofF  sharp  and  crisp  it  has  reached  the  crack.  The 
final  stage  is  the  "caramel"  (350°  F.)  which  comes  very  quickly 
after  the  crack,  the  syrup  becoming  first  a  pale  yellow,  and 
then  a  rich  golden  brown,  and  finally  black  or  burnt.  When 
it  first  reaches  this  stage  the  pan  should  be  removed  from  the 
fire,  a  little  lemon  juice  or  water  added,  and  then  the  whole 
reboiled  to  the  proper  stage  or  shade.  To  prevent  granu- 
lation, it  often  is  advisable  to  add  a  pinch  of  cream  of  tartar» 
to  the  pound  of  sugar. 

Chocolate  Fudge 

1  cupful  milk  2  cupfuls  sugar 
Pinch  of  salt                                    }4  tablespoonful  Crisco 

2  squares  (2  ozs.)  chocolate  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

Put  Crisco,  milk,  sugar,  salt,  and  chocolate  into  saucepan,  and  stir 
and  boil  until  it  forms  a  soft  ball  when  tested  in  cold  water,  or  240°  F. 
Remove  from  fire,  add  extract,  allow  to  stand  a  minute,  and  beat  until 
creamy.     Pour  into  Criscoed  tin  and  mark  ofF  into  squares. 

Clear  Almond  Taffy 

4  cupfuls  sugar  1  cupful  water 

yi  cupful  Crisco  2  cupfuls  almonds 

Pinch  cream  of  tartar  ^  teaspoonful  almond  extract 

y^  teaspoonful  salt 

Blanch,  split,  and  bake  almonds  to  golden  brown.  Crisco  a  tin,  and 
sprinkle  almonds  on  it  split  side  down.  Dissolve  sugar  and  water  together 
in  saucepan,  add  Crisco,  salt,  and  cream  of  tartar,  and  boil  until  when  tested 
in  cold  water  it  will  be  brittle,  or  300°  F.  Add  almond  extract  and  pour 
over  nuts.     When  firm,  cut  in  squares. 

Sufficient  for  one  large  pan. 

Cocoanut  Caramels 

1  cupful  desiccated  cocoanut  l  cupful  milk 

2  tablespoonfuls  glucose  1  cupful  cream 

1  lb.  brown  sugar  1  teaspoonful  rose  extract 

}4  cupful  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  almond  extract 

yi  teaspoonful  salt 

Soak  cocoanut  in  milk  for  twenty  minutes,  then  put  it  into  a  saucepan 
with  sugar,  glucose,  salt,  and  one-third  of  the  Crisco,  add  second  third  of 
Crisco  when  it  forms  heavy  thread,  or  registers  230°  F.,  add  third  piece 

144 


Candies 

of  Crisco,  cream  and  extracts,  when  it  again  reaches  230°  F.  When  it 
reaches  the  hard  ball  stage  or  250°  F.,  turn  at  once  into  a  Criscoed  tin. 
Cut  when  half  cold.    When  all  are  cut,  wrap  each  caramel  in  waxed  paper. 

Crisco  Drops 

)4  cupful  golden  syrup  j^  cupful  water 

4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

^2  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

Put  Crisco,  golden  syrup,  water,  and  salt  into  saucepan  and  boil  until 
it  is  almost  brittle  when  tested  in  cold  water,  or  290°  F.,  then  add  vanilla. 
Allow  to  cool  down,  and  then  drop  on  to  Criscoed  tin. 

Sufficient  for  twenty  drops. 

Cream  Candy 

}4  cupful  water  1  tablespoonful  Crisco,  melted 

2  cupfuls  brown  sugar  1  teaspoonful  orange  extract 

}4  teaspoonful  salt 

Dissolve  sugar  in  water  in  saucepan  over  fire,  and  boil  until  it  spins  a 
heavy  thread,  add  Crisco  and  salt  and  boil  until  it  forms  a  soft  ball  when 
tested  in  cold  water,  or  240°  F.  Remove  pan  from  fire,  add  orange  ex- 
tract, allow  to  stand  five  minutes,  then  stir  until  the  syrup  begins  to  "grain." 
Pour  qui.kly  into  wet  tin.  When  half  cold,  mark  into  squares;  leave  til! 
following  day  in  a  cool  place;  then  break  up.     Keep  in  airtight  tins. 

Sufficient  for  twenty  small  squares. 

Crisco  Fruit  Fudge 

2  cupfuls  sugar  1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

1  cupful  milk  yi  cupful  chopped  English 

2  tablespoonfuls  cocoa  walnut  meats 

2  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  }4  cupful  sultana  raisins 

1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract  2  tablespoonfuls  cream 

Pinch  of  salt 

Put  Crisco,  sugar,  cocoa,  salt,  and  milk  into  saucepan,  and  stir  till 
it  boils  to  240°,  or  until  it  forms  a  soft  ball  when  tested  in  cold  water. 
Remove  from  fire,  add  raisins,  cream,  nut  meats,  and  extracts,  and  beat 
mixture  until  thick  and  creamy.  Put  back  on  stove,  and  heat,  stirring 
constantly  until  melted,  then  pour  into  Criscoed  tins.  When  partly  cool 
mark  into  neat  squares. 

Sufficient  for  thirty  squares. 

Everton  Taffy 

1  gill  water  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

2  cupfuls  brown  sugar  Pinch  cream  of  tartar 
4  tablespoonfuls  Crisco                   ^  teaspoonful  salt 

Put  sugar  and  water  into  saucepan;  stir  occasionally  until  it  boils; 
then  add  cream  of  tartar.     Put  cover  on  pan  and  boil  five  minutes,  add 

145 


Candies 

Crisco  and  salt  and  boil  until,  when  tried  in  cold  water  it  will  snap,  or  300° 
F.  Add  vanilla  and  pour  into  Criscoed  tin.  Mark  in  squares  when  half 
cold,  and  break  up  when  quite  cold.    Wrap  in  waxed  paper. 

Fig  Fudge 

Pinch  cream  of  tartar  Pinch  salt 

yi  lb.  chopped  figs  1  tablespoonful  Crisco 

1  lb.  brown  sugar  1  cupful  water 

1  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

Wash  and  dry  iigs,  then  chop  them.  Put  sugar  and  water  into  sauce- 
pan, and  dissolve,  add  Crisco  and  cream  of  tartar,  and  when  it  boils,  add 
figs,  and  boil  to  a  soft  ball  when  tried  in  cold  water,  or  240°  F.,  stirring  all 
the  time.  Remove  pan  from  fire,  add  lemon  extract  and  salt,  cool  five 
minutes,  then  stir  until  it  begins  to  grain,  and  quickly  pour  into  Criscoed 
tin.    When  half  cold  mark  in  squares. 

Honey  Squares 

1  cupful  strained  honey  J^  cupful  cream 

1  cupful  brown  sugar  ^  teaspoonful  salt 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  Pinch  cream  of  tartar 

I  teaspoonful  lemon  extract 

Put  Crisco,  salt,  honey,  cream  and  sugar  into  saucepan;  stir  over  slow 
fire  until  dissolved,  then  add  cream  of  tartar.  Boil  until  it  forms  a  hard 
ball  when  tested  in  cold  water,  or  252°  F.  Remove  from  fire,  stir  in  lemon 
extract,  and  pour  into  Criscoed  tin.  Mark  into  squares  before  cold.  Wrap 
in  waxed  paper. 

Sufficient  for  twenty-five  squares. 

Maple  Candy 

1  cupful  maple  sugar  }i  teaspoonful  salt 

}4  cupful  brown  sugar  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

1  tablespoonful  Crisco  1  cupful  water 

Dissolve  sugars  in  water  in  saucepan  over  fire,  when  boiling  add 
Crisco  and  salt  and  boil  until  it  hardens  when  dropped  in  cold  water, 
or  258°  F.  Remove  from  fire  and  add  vanilla.  Pour  into  Criscoed  tins. 
When  half  cold  mark  into  squares.    Wrap  in  waxed  paper. 

Molasses  Candy 

2  cupfuls  brown  sugar  }4  teaspoonful  salt 
}4  cupful  molasses  1  gill  water 

3  tablespoonfuls  Crisco  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

Dissolve  sugar  in  water  in  saucepan  over  fire,  then  add  Crisco,  mo- 
lasses, and  salt  and  boil  until  when  tested  in  cold  water  it  forms  a  hard 
ball,  or  254°  F.  Now  add  vanilla  and  pour  into  Criscoed  tin.  When 
quite  cold  break  into  rough  pieces. 

146 


Candies 


Peanut  Fudge 


2  cupfuls  brown  sugar  }4  teaspoonful  salt 

y4  tablespoonful  Crisco  1  cupful  chopped  peanuts 

1  cupful  milk  1  teaspoonful  vanilla  extract 

Boil  milk,  sugar,  Crisco,  and  salt  until  it  forms  a  soft  ball  when  tested 
in  cold  water,  or  240°  F.  Remove  from  fire,  add  nuts  and  vanilla,  beat 
until  creamy.     Pour  into  Criscoed  tins,  and  when  cool  cut  into  cubes. 


147 


Jb' 


"New,  [ocd  di[isticn  vuait  tn  att*iiU 
and  health  tn  btth. " 


^  Calendar  of  Dinners 


January  1 

*Black  Bean  Soup 
Roast  Leg  of  Mutton,  Currant  Jelly 
Stewed  Tomatoes    Baked  Sweet  Potatoes 
Macedoine  Salad 
Cheese   Straws 
Fruit  Cake  Coffee 

*Black Bean  Soup — 2  cups  black  beans, 
3  tablespoons  Crisco,  1  onion,  1 
lemon,  2  quarts  stock  or  water,  2 
stalks  celery,  2  hard-cooked  eggs,  \}4 
tablespoons  flour,  3  cloves,  1  table- 
spoon Worcestershire  sauce,  salt,  pep- 
per, red  pepper,  and  mustard  to  taste. 
Wash  beans  and  soak  over  night;  in 
morning  drain,  cover  with  boiling 
water  and  boil  30  minutes;  drain, 
throwing  away  water.  Slice  onion, 
dice  celery,  and  cook  5  minutes  in  half 
of  Crisco  in  soup  pot;  add  beans, 
stock  or  water,  and  cloves.  Simmer 
until  beans  are  soft,  add  more  water 
as  stock  or  water  boils  away.  Rub 
through  sieve,  add  remaining  Crisco 
and  flour  rubbed  together,  then  heat 
to  boiling  point,  add  seasonings.  Cut 
lemon  in  thin  slices,  removing  seeds, 
and  cut  eggs  in  thin  slices.  Put  them 
into  a  hot  soup  tureen,  and  strain 
soup  over  them. 


January  2 

Palestine  Soup 
*  Jugged  Hare,  Red  Currant  Jelly 
Brussels  Sprouts  Potato  Puff 

Endive  Salad 

Cheese  Fingers 
Vanilla  Souffle  Coffee 
*Jugged  Hare — 1  hare,  1  cup  Crisco, 
\}4  pounds  gravy  beef,  1  onion,  1 
lemon,  6  cloves,  1  cup  port  wine,  few 
forcemeat  balls,  salt,  red  pepper  and 
pepper  to  taste. 

Skin,  paunch  and  wash  hare,  cut 
it  into  pieces,  dredge  with  flour,  and 
fry  in  hot  Crisco.  Have  ready  1^ 
pints  gravy,  made  from  beef,  and 
thickened  with  flour.  Put  this  into 
jar;  add  pieces  of  fried  hare,  onion 
stuck  with  cloves,  lemon  peeled  and 
sliced,  and  seasonings;  cover  jar 
tightly,  put  into  saucepan  of  boiling 
water,  and  let  it  stew  until  hare  is 
quite  tender,  taking  care  to  keep  the 
water  boiling.  When  nearly  ready 
pour  in  wine,  add  forcemeat  balls,  and 
allow  to  cook  10  minutes.  Serve  with 
red  currant  jelly. 

For  forcemeat  balls,  mix  together 
in  basin,  2  tablespoons  Crisco, 4  table- 
spoons crumbs,  1  tablespoon  chopped 


149 


^4i 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


parsley,  yi  teaspoon  poultry  season- 
ing, M  teaspoon  grated  lemon  rind, 
seasoning  of  salt,  pepper,  red  pepper, 
and  paprika,  and  1  beaten  egg,  form 
into  small  balls,  roll  in  flour,  and  add 
to  hare. 

January  3 

*Lobster  Bisque        Toasted  Crackers 

Olives         Celery  Pickles 

Roast  Pigeons  Sweet  Potatoes 

Fried  Hominy 

Lettuce  Salad  Cheese  Balls 

Lemon  Meringue  Pie        Cofee 

*Lobster  Bisque — 4   tablespoons   flour, 

3  tablespoons  Crisco,  1  tablespoon 
salt,  1  head  celery,  2  lobsters,  1 
small  onion,  6  whole  white  peppers, 

4  sprigs  parsley,  1  quart  milk,  white 
pepper  to  taste. 

Cover  lobsters  with  boiling  water, 
add  salt,  celery  diced,  whole  peppers, 
parsley  and  onion.  Cook  until 
lobsters'  claws  can  easily  be  pulled 
apart;  it  will  probably  take  25  min- 
utes. When  cool  enough  to  handle, 
cut  lobsters  down  back,  remove  meat 
from  body  and  claws.  Save  coral. 
Put  back  all  tough  parts  with  small 
claws  and  shells,  and  cook  for  20  min- 
utes in  same  liquor.  Liquor  must  be 
oonsiderably  reduced.  Dry  coral,  rub 
through  sieve.  Blend  Crisco  and 
flour  in  saucepan  over  fire,  stir  in 
milk,  let  this  come  to  boil,  add  2  cups 
of  strained  lobster  broth.  Bring  to 
boiling  point,  season  with  salt  and 
pepper,  and  stir  in  sifted  coral  enough 
to  give  liquid  bright  pink  color.  Place 
lobster  meat  cut  in  fine  pieces  in  hot 
tureen,  pour  hot  mixture  over  and 
serve  hot. 

January  4 

Lentil  Soup 

Roast  Loin  of  Pork,  Apple  Sauce 
Potato  Balls       Artichokes,  a  la  Creme 

*Orange  Salad  Cheese  Fingers 
Pineapple  Pudding  Coffee 
*Orange  Salad — 1  tablespoon  brandy, 
1  tablespoon  melted  Crisco,  H  tea- 
spoon sugar,  1  teaspoon  chopped 
tarragon,  1  teaspoon  chopped  cher- 
vil, and  6  oranges. 


Cut  peel  from  oranges,  carefully  re- 
moving all  pith,  cut  out  pulpy  pieces 
in  each  of  natural  divisions  so  that 
there  is  no  skin  of  any  kind  or  pips 
taken  out  with  pieces  fruit,  sprinkle 
over  these  pieces  tarragon,  chervil, 
melted  Crisco,  brandy  and  sugar. 
This  salad  should  be  placed  on  ice  if 
possible  1  hour  before  serving. 

January  5 

Cheese  Canapes 
Julienne  Soup       Bread  Sticks 
*  Roast  Stuffed  Chicken,  Brown  Gravy 
Creamed  Cauliflower    Potato  Croquettes 
Olive  Salad  Cheese  Relish 

Pistachio  Ice  Cream  Coffee 
*  Roast  Stuffed  Chicken — 6  tablespoons 
breadcrumbs,  2  tablespoons  Crisco, 
2  tablespoons  chopped  cooked  ham, 
1  beaten  egg,  1  teaspoon  chopped  pars- 
ley, 1  chicken,  2  tablespoons  milk, 
seasoning  red  pepper,  white  pepper, 
salt,  powdered  mace  and  herbstotaste. 
Clean  and  draw  chicken.  Melt 
Crisco,  add  it  to  crumbs,  ham,  egg, 
parsley,  milk,  and  seasonings;  mix 
and  place  in  breast  of  fowl.  If  young 
chicken  leave  on  feet,  which  should  be 
scalded  and  skinned;  if  an  older  bird, 
cut  off  legs  half-way  to  first  joint,  turn 
back  pinions,  run  skewer  through 
them,  catching  top  part  of  legs;  tie 
bottom  part  of  legs  together.  Set  in 
hot  oven  from  ^  to  IX  hours,  ac- 
cording to  size;  baste  well  with  melted 
Crisco,  and  about  15  minutes  before 
it  is  finished  dredge  with  flour  and 
brown.  To  make  brown  gravy,  pour 
from  tin  fat,  sprinkle  in  2  teaspoons 
browned  flour,  then  add  1  cup  boiling 
water,  containing  ^2  teaspoon  extract 
beef,  salt  and  pepper;  allow  this  to 
boil  3  minutes,  strain  over  chicken,  or 
serve  in  sauceboat. 

January  6 

Oyster  Cocktail 

Fried  Cod  Steaks 
Potatoes  au  Gratin     *Stewed  Tomatoes 
Cold  Slaw  Cheese  Wafers 

Cocoanut  Pudding      Coffee 
*Stewed  Tomatoes — 1  can  tomatoes,  2 
tablespoons  Crisco,!  cup  breadcrumbs, 
seasoning  salt,   pepper  and  paprika. 


150 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Empty  tomatoes  into  double  boiler, 
add  breadcrumbs,  salt,  pepper,  and 
paprika,  and  cook  slowly  for  }4  an 
hour,  stirring  from  time  to  time.  Just 
before  serving  add  Crisco  and  stir  till 
melted.  While  the  tomatoes  will  be 
ready  with  }4  hour's  cooking,  they 
are  improved  by  cooking  1  hour,  and 
are  better  still  if  warmed  again  after 
cooling. 

January  7 

Clam  Cocktail 

Boiled  Salmon  with  Parsley  Butter 

Roast    Duck,    Olive   Sauce 

and  Fried  Hominy 

Riced  Potatoes         French   Peas 

Creamed  Salsify       Celery  Mayonnaise 

*Cheese  Ramekins 

Banbury  Tarts        Coffee 

*Cheese Ramekins — 4  tablespoons  flour, 

3   tablespoons    Crisco,   yi  cup    milk, 

3  whole  eggs,  1  white  egg,  salt,  white 

pepper,  and  red  pepper  to  taste,  and 

yi  cup  grated  cheese. 

In  saucepan,  mix  Crisco  and  flour 
over  fire,  when  smooth  stir  in  milk, 
and  cook  until  thick,  add  seasonings; 
mix  well.  Remove  pan  from  fire,  add 
yolks  eggs  1  by  1,  mix  each  thoroughly, 
then  mix  in  cheese,  and  fold  in  stifily 
beaten  white  egg.  Pour  into  Criscoed 
ramekins,  and  bake  in  hot  oven  15 
minutes.     Serve  hot. 

January  8 

Cherry  Cocktail 

Corn  Soup  Crisp  Crackers 

Pot  Roast  with  Dumplings 

Lettuce  and  Radish  Salad 

*Cheese  Biscuits 

Spice  Jelly  Coffee 

*Cheese  Biscuits — 4   teaspoons   flour, 

6  tablespoons  grated  Parmesan  cheese, 

3  tablespoons  Crisco,  1  yolk  of  egg,  2 

teaspoons   cold   water,   salt   and   red 

pepper  to  taste. 

Mix  flour  and  cheese;  add  salt  and 
red  pepper  to  taste.  Rub  in  Crisco 
lightly.  Mix  yolk  egg  with  water; 
add  enough  of  these  to  mix  flour,  etc., 
to  stiff  paste.  Knead  till  smooth  on 
floured  board,  then  roll  out  and  cut 


into  biscuits  with  small  cutter;  lay  on 
Criscoed  tin  and  bake  in  quick  oven 
8  to  10  minutes,  or  until  they  are  a 
delicate  biscuit  color.  They  require 
to  be  carefully  watched,  as  they  burn 
easily.  Parmesan  cheese  is  best,  but 
other  dry  kinds  can  be  used.  The 
biscuits  are  brittle,  so  always  prepare 
more  than  are  actually  required.  They 
rewarm  well  with  care. 

January  9 

Vermicelli  Soup 
*Beef  Loaf,  Tomato  Sauce 
Mashed  Potatoes  Baked  Squash 

Apple  and  Celery  Salad 
Cheese  Wafers 
Mince  Pie  Coffee 

*Beef  Loaf — 2  pounds  lean  meat,  3 
tablespoons  Crisco,  ^  pound  salt 
pork,  1  cup  cracker  crumbs,  3  beaten 
eggs,  1  teaspoon  onion  juice,  1  table- 
spoon lemon  juice,  1  cup  beef  stock, 
salt  and  pepper  to  taste. 

Wipe  meat,  remove  all  skin  and 
membranes,  then  put  it  through  meat 
grinder,  add  Crisco  melted,  eggs, 
crumbs,  onion  juice,  lemon  juice, 
stock  and  seasonings.  Press  into 
greasC'd  pan  and  cover.  Bake  1  hour. 
Baste  occasionally  during  baking 
with  melted  Crisco. 

January  10 

Cream  of  Carrot  Soup 
'  Pickles  Celery  Olives 

*Beef  Steak   and    Kidney    Pie 

Baked  Potatoes  Scalloped  Onions 

Cauliflower  Salad 

Cheese  Crackers 

Lemon  Snow  Coffee 

*Beef    Steak     and      Kidney     Pie— 2 

pounds  lean  steak,  4  sheep's  kidneys, 

some  melted  Crisco,  salt  and  pepper 

to  taste,  1  tablespoon  Worcestershire 

sauce,  and  some  pie  crust. 

Cut  steak  very  thinly  and  dip  it  in 
melted  Crisco,  then  in  flour  seasoned 
with  salt  and  pepper.  Roll  up  pieces 
of  steak  and  lay  them  in  fireproof 
baking  dish.  Skin  kidneys,  cut  them 
in  thin  slices,  leaving  out  fat  in  mid- 
dle kidney;  dip  them  also  in  season- 

151 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


ings  and  lay  them  on  top  of  meat 
Sprinkle  in  Worcestershire  sauce  and 
fill  up  dish  with  water.  Roll  pastry 
rather  larger  than  size  required  for 
dish.  Wet  edge  of  dish  and  put  nar- 
row band  of  paste  round;  wet  band, 
place  on  it  remainder  of  paste,  which 
cut  to  size  of  dish,  then  pinch  edges, 
and  brush  over  with  beaten  egg. 
Make  large  hole  in  top  and  into  this 
put  ends  some  leaf-shaped  pieces  of 
paste,  with  an  ornament  in  center; 
brush  leaves  over  with  egg  and  bake 
in  hot  oven  Xyi  hours. 

January  11 

Tomato  Bisque 

Pickled  Peaches       Celery 

*  Roast  Rabbity  Currant  Jelly  Sauce 

Hominy  Squares 

Riced  Potatoes       Boiled  Onions 

Cranberry  Salad 

Apricot  Tapioca 
Coffee 

*  Roast  Rabbit — 6  tablespoons  bread- 
crumbs, 3  tablespoons  chopped 
cooked  ham,  3  tablespoons  Crisco,  1 
tablespoon  chopped  parsley,  1  tea- 
spoon grated  lemon  rind,  \4  teaspoon 
powdered  herbs,  3  chopped  mush- 
rooms, three  beaten  eggs,  1  rabbit, 
salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper  to  taste. 
Beat  up  eggs,  add  mushrooms,  Crisco, 
ham,  breadcrumbs,  parsley,  and 
seasonings,  and  mix  well.  Wipe  rab- 
bit, and  season  inside  with  pepper, 
salt,  and  powdered  cloves.  Lay  force- 
meat inside  rabbit  and  sew  top; 
skewer  head  back  and  legs  on  each 
side;  roast  1  hour,  basting  well  with 
melted  Crisco.  Serve  hot  with  cur- 
rant jelly  sauce. 

January  12 

Clear  Soup 

Roast  Duck,  Plum  Jelly 

Mashed  Turnips       *  Potato  Croquettes 

Apple  Salad 

Hot  Cheese  Wafers 

Grape  Fruit  Jelly     .    Coffee 

*  Potato  Croquettes — 2  pints  mashed 
potatoes,  2  eggs,  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  1  tablespoon  chopped  parsley, 
salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper  to  taste. 


Mash  potatoes  by  rubbing  them 
through  wire  sieve  with  back  of  wood- 
en spoon;  dissolve  Crisco,  add  it  to 
potatoes  with  1  of  eggs  well  beaten 
and  seasonings.  Mix  and  divide  into 
10  or  12  pieces,  form  them  into  neat 
croquettes,  brush  over  with  remain- 
ing beaten  egg,  toss  in  breadcrumbs, 
and  fry  in  hot  Crisco. 

January  13 

Oysters   on    Half  Shell 
Radishes  Pickled  Pears 

*Mutton  Cutlets  ' 
Potato  Balls     Chestnut  Puree 
Lettuce,  French  Dressing 
Pineapple  Bavarian  Cream 

Cakes  Coffee 
*Mutton  Cutlets — Slit  1  pound  chest- 
nuts, place  in  hot  oven  to  loosen  skins, 
shell  and  take  off  inner  skin.  Place  in 
saucepan  with  gravy  to  cover  and  yi 
teaspoon  salt.  Boil  until  tender,  then 
drain  and  rub  through  sieve.  Chop 
fine  2  slices  ham,  add  2  tablespoons 
Crisco  with  >4  pound  chestnut  puree, 
season  with  salt,  pepper  and  red  pep- 
per. Add  1  egg  yolk  and  mix.  Trim 
8  cutlets,  make  }4  cup  Crisco  hot  in 
frying  pan,  cook  cutlets  1  minute  on 
right  side  only,  then  arrange  them  flat 
oh  dish,  cover  with  another  with 
weight  on  top,  leave  until  cold.  Spread 
puree  over  cooked  side  of  cutlets, 
brush  with  beaten  egg  and  cover  with 
breadcrumbs.  Fry  on  both  sides,  and 
place  in  oven  5  minutes.  Dish  in  cir- 
cle on  mashed  potatoes;  fill  center 
with  fried  potato  balls  and  sprinkle 
with  chopped  parsley.  Serve  with 
gravy. 

January  14 

Cream  of  Cheese  Soup 
Celery  Olives 

*Codfish  Balls 
Baked  Potatoes 
Baked  Macaroni  and  Peas 
Spinach  Salad 
Cheese  Relish       Fig  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Codfish  Balls — 2  cupfuls  mashed  -po- 
tatoes, 1>^  cupfuls  shredded  codfish, 
1  egg,  1  tablespoonful  Crisco,  melted, 


152 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


yi  teaspoonful  pepper.  Put  codfish 
in  wire  strainer,  let  cold  water  run 
through  and  squeeze  dry.  Mix  the 
hot,  unseasoned  potatoes  with  codfish. 
To  this  add  the  melted  Crisco,  beaten 
egg  and  pepper.  Beat  well.  Shape 
in  balls  and  fry  in  deep  Crisco  until  a 
golden  brown  color. 

January  15 

Vegetable  Soup 

Pickled  Beets  Celery  Olives 

Sauted  Chicken,  Brown  Gravy 

*Candied  Sweet  Potatoes 

Lettuce  and  Green  Pepper  Salad 

Plum   Pudding,   Hard  Sauce 

Cofee 

^Candied  Sweet  Potatoes — 12  sweet 
potatoes,  1  cup  boiling  water,  brown 
sugar,  %  cup  Crisco,  salt,  pepper, 
and  powdered  cinnamon.  Pare  and 
parboil  potatoes,  cut  in  halves,  boil 
10  minutes,  drain,  lay  in  greased 
baking  dish.  Spread  with  Crisco, 
sprinkle  with  brown  sugar,  salt, 
pepper,  and  powdered  cinnamon,  pour 
in  boiling  water  and  cook  until  tender. 
Baste  often  with  sauce  in  pan  while 
•  cooking.  The  cinnamon  may  be 
omitted. 

January  16 

*Lettuce  Cocktail 
Cream  of  Spinach  Soup 

Broiled  Hamburg  Steak 
Baked  Potatoes  Brussels  Sprouts 

Pineapple  Salad 

Cheese  Balls 

Urney  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Lettuce  Cocktail —  1  crisp  head  of 
lettuce,  4  tablespoons  tomato  catsup, 
2  tablespoons  Crisco,  2  tablespoons 
Worcestershire  sauce,  4  hard-cooked 
eggs,  4  tablespoons  vinegar,  3  table- 
spoons sugar,  4  small  onions,  and 
salt   to   taste. 

Cut  lettuce  fine  with  scissors  and 
shred  eggs  and  onions.  Melt  Crisco, 
when  cool,  add  tomato  catsup,  Wor- 


cestershire sauce,  sugar,  vinegar  and 
salt.  At  serving  time  pour  this  sauce 
over  lettuce,  eggs  and  onions.  Serve 
very  cold  in  cocktail  glasses. 

January  17 

Prune  Cocktail 

*Brown   Fricassee    of   Chicken 

Boiled  Rice        Baking  Powder  Biscuit 

Apple  and  Celery  Salad 

Mince  Pie 

Coffee 

*Brown  Fricassee  of  Chicken — Draw, 
singe,  and  joint  chicken.  Put  4  table- 
spoons Crisco  in  saucepan;  when 
brown,  put  in  chicken.  Stir  until  every 
piece  is  nicely  browned,  then  add  2 
tablespoons  flour,  stir  again,  add  1 
pint  boiling  water  or  stock,  stir  until 
it  boils;  add  1  teaspoon  of  salt.  Cover, 
and  let  simmer  gently  until  tender, 
then  add  1  teaspoon  onion  juice,  and 
little  black  pepper.  Put  neck-piece, 
heart,  liver,  gizzard,  and  back  pieces 
in  center  of  dish;  put  2  pieces  of  breast 
on  top,  second  joints  on  one  side  of 
pla'te,  legs  crossed  on  other,  and  wing 
at  each  end  of  plate.  Pour  sauce  over, 
sprinkle  with  chopped  parsley,  and 
serve. 

January  18 

Broiled  Halibut 
Maitre  d'  Hotel  Potatoes 
*Escalloped  Tomatoes 

Lettuce,  French  Dressing 
Pumpkin  Pie     Cheese  Squares 
Coffee 

*Escalloped  Tomatoes — Drain  juice 
from  1  can  tomatoes.  Brush  baking 
dish  over  with  Crisco,  and  cover  bot- 
tom with  tomatoes;  dot  with  Crisco, 
dredge  with  pepper  and  salt,  and 
sprinkle  generously  with  breadcrumbs; 
arrange  another  layer  of  tomatoes, 
and  crumbs,  and  so  proceed  until  dish 
is  filled.  Pour  over  all  enough  of 
juice  of  tomatoes  to  moisten  well,  and 
then  finish  dish  with  covering  of 
crumbs.  Bake  20 minutes  in  moderate 


153 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


January  19 

Consomme  with  Vermicelli 

Grated  Parmesan  Cheese 

Fried  Oysters,  Sauce  Tartare 

*  Mushrooms  Cooked  Under  Glass  Bells 

Supreme  of  Chicken 

Asparagus,  Cream  Glad 

Orange  Ice  Cofee 

^Mushrooms  Cooked  Under  Glass 
Bells — Saute  }4  pound  of  peeled  mush- 
room caps  in  3  tablespoons  Crisco, 
season  with  salt  and  paprika,  add  1 
cup  of  cream,  cover  and  let  simmer 
until  reduced  a  little.  Arrange  mush- 
rooms on  round  of  bread  in  mushroom 
dish,  pour  liquid  over,  cover  with  glass 
bell  and  bake  20  minutes  in  moderate 
oven.  Send  to  table  without  removing 
glass,  which  confines  delicate  flavor 
and  aroma  of  mushrooms. 

January  20 

Clam  Chowder 
Rolled  Beefsteak,  Peanut  Butter  Sauce 
Succotash  Boiled  Onions 

*Cream  Cheese  and  Pimiento  Salad 
Baked  Custard  Lady  Fingers 
Black  Cofee 
*Cream  Cheese  and  Pimiento  Salad — 
Wash  and  dry  1  can  pimientoes.  Fill 
them  with  creamed  cheese.  Chill, 
slice  and  serve  on  crisp  lettuce  leaves 
with  following  dressing  :  Mix  }4  table- 
spoon salt,  yi  tablespoon  mustard,  ^ 
tablespoon  sugar,  and  1  tablespoon 
flour,  and  when  thoroughly  blended, 
add  2  egg  yolks,  slightly  beaten,  3 
tablespoons  melted  Crisco,  ^  cup 
milk,  and  ^  cup  vinegar.  Cook  in 
double  boiler,  stirring  constantly,  until 
mixture  thickens.     Strain  and  cool. 

January  21 

*Cream  of  Lettuce  Soup 
Roast  Shoulder  of  Mutton,  Caper  Sauce 
Mashed  Potatoes       Baked  Squash 
Celery  Salad     Cheese  Wafers 
Apple  Tapioca        Cofee 
*Cream  of  Lettuce  Soup — 3  cups  white 
stock,  2  heads  lettuce,  2  tablespoons 
cooked  rice,  yi  cup  cream,  %  table- 
spoon onion,  finely  chopped,  1  table- 
spoon  Crisco,   yolk    1    egg,   nutmeg, 


salt  and  pepper  to  taste.  Remove 
outer  leaves  from  lettuce  and  shred 
it.  Cook  onion  5  minutes  in  Crisco, 
add  lettuce,  rice,  and  stock.  Add 
cream,  yolk  egg  slightly  beaten,  nut- 
meg, salt,  and  pepper  to  taste, 

January  22 

Filleted  Anchovies  with  Lemon 
Celery         Ripe  Olives 

Salted  Pistachio  Nuts 
Consomme,  a  la  Royale 

*  Halibut  Turbans 

Roast  Goose,  Apple  Jelly 

Potato  Puff  Mashed  Turnip 

Endive  and  Roquefort  Cheese  Salad 

Coupe  St.  Jacques        Coffee 

*  Halibut  Turbans  —  Have  4  slices 
halibut  cut  }4  an  inch  thick;  remove 
skin  and  bone,  thus  securing  16 
fillets.  Dip  in  melted  Crisco;  squeeze 
over  juice  of  1  lemon,  little  onion 
juice  and  sprinkle  with  salt  and  pep- 
per. Commencing  with  the  widest 
end,  roll  each  fillet  into  a  "turban" 
and  fasten  by  running  through  each 
Criscoed  wooden  skewer.  Bake  20 
minutes,  basting  with  hot  stock,  or 
Crisco  melted  in  hot  water.  Arrange 
crown  shape  on  serving  dish.  Fill  the 
center  with  boiled  potato-balls,  dress- 
ed with  salt,  Crisco,  and  chopped  pars- 
ley.   Serve  with  Hollandaise  sauce. 

January  23 

Barley  Soup       Corned  Beef 

*Ladies'  Cabbage         Fried  Celery 

Beet  Salad 

Cheese  Crackers 

Arrowroot  Pudding  with  Stewed  Fruit 

Coffee 

*Ladies'Cabbage — Cut  small,  hard  head 
cabbage  into  halves;  remove  core  and 
harder  portions,  chop  remaining  part 
quite  fine.  Throw  this  into  kettle  of 
boiling  salted  water,  boil  uncovered 
for  30  minutes;  drain  in  colander. 
Put  cabbage  back  in  saucepan,  add  2 
tablespoons  Crisco,  1  tablespoon 
flour;  dust  flour  over  cabbage;  stir 
carefully  with  wooden  spoon,  and 
add  yi  pint  of  milk,  yi  teaspoon  of 


154 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


salt  and  1  saitspoon  of  white  pepper. 
Stand  this  on  back  part  of  stove  to 
simmer  10  minutes;  send  to  table. 

January  24 

Blue  Points     Brown  Bread  Sandwiches 
Broiled  Squabs 

Potato  Croquettes 
*CauliJlower  au  Gratin 
Asparagus  Salad 

Cheese  Fingers 
Spanish  Cream 
Coffee 
^Cauliflower  au  Gratin — Boil  1   large 
cauliflower,     drain     it,      and     break 
sprigs    apart.     Arrange    in    layers   in 
Criscoed  baking  dish,  sprinkling  each 
layer  with  cheese,  seasoning  it  with 
pepper    and    salt,    and    little    melted 
Crisco.     When  dish  is  filled  pour  on 
1  cup  white  sauce,  sprinkle  top  with 
crumbs  and  cheese,  and  let  bake  15 
minutes  to  brown. 

January  25 

Sardines  on  Toast,  Caper  Sauce 

*  Risotto  Peas 

Fried  Canned  Tomatoes 

Lettuce  and  Hard-Cooked  Eggs 

Jellied  Prunes  Whipped  Cream 

Gold  Cake 

Coffee 

*  Risotto — yi     pound     rice,     1     small 

onion,  4  tablespoons  Crisco,  }i  cup 

grated     Parmesan     cheese,     yi     pint 

tomato    sauce,    about    1    pint    good 

stock,  salt,  pepper,   nutmeg,  and   }4 

teaspoon  saflFron. 

Wash  rice  in  several  courses  of  water, 
drain  and  dry.  Peel  and  chop  onion. 
Melt  Crisco  in  stewpan;  when  hot  add 
onion,  fry  over  gentle  fire  until  light 
fawn  color,  then  add  rice;  shake  pan 
over  fire  for  a  few  minutes,  so  as  to 
fry  rice  a  little.  Next  add  seasoning, 
salt,  pepper,  nutmeg,  and  saffron; 
moisten  with  little  stock,  and  add 
more  as  rice  begins  to  swell.  When 
stock  is  used  up,  gradually  add  sauce. 
When  rice  is  tender  mix  in  grated 
cheese.  It  is  then  ready  to  serve.  In 
preparing  this  dish  remember  that 
rice  should  be  well  done,  and  should 
be  neither  too  dry  nor  too  moist. 


January  26 

Onion  Soup 
Roast  Chicken,  Chestnut  Stuffings 

Giblet  Sauce 
Cranberries  Celery  au  Jus 

Baked  Macaroni  with  Cheese 

*Grapefruit  Salad 

Burnt  Almond  Ice  Cream 

Coffee 

*Grapefruit  Salad — Take  out  inside  of 
grapefruit,  and  cut  edge  of  shell  into 
points;  slice  meat  of  fruit  with  2  oran- 
ges, 1  cup  pineapple,  1  cup  cherries, 
^2  cup  chopped  nut  meats,  1  diced 
apple,  the  juice  of  1  lemon,  and  3 
tablespoons  powdered  sugar;  fill  shell, 
and  serve  with  following  dressing: 

Beat  yolks  2  eggs  until  creamy, 
then  add  to  them  ^  teaspoon  dry 
mustard  and  same  quantity  salt. 
Next  beat  in  slowly  4  tablespoons 
melted  Crisco  and  6  tablespoons  hot 
vinegar.  Cook  in  double  boiler  until 
it  thickens.  When  cold,  and  just  be- 
fore serving,  1  cup  of  cream,  sweet  or 
sour,  may  be  folded  in. 

January  27 

Shrimp  Cocktail 
*Salmon  Croquettes,  Tomato  Sauce 
French  Peas      Mashed  Potatoes 

Pickled  Mangoes 

Cottage  Pudding,  Maple  Sauce 

Coffee 

*Salmon  Croquettes — 1  pound  can 
salmon,  }/3  teaspoon  salt,  red  pepper 
to  taste,  ^  cup  crackercrumbs,  ^ 
teaspoon  grated  onion,  1  well  beaten 
egg,  1  tablespoon  Crisco,  and  1 
tablespoon  chopped  parsley. 

From  1  can  salmon,  opened  neatly, 
take  fish  and  chop  it  fine;  add  salt  and 
pepper,  Crisco,  parsley  and  cracker- 
crumbs;  moisten  it  with  the  egg  and 
mix  well,  turn  out  upon  dish;  then 
roll  into  cones,  dip  these  in  beaten 
egg  seasoned  with  salt  and  pepper, 
roll  in  breadcrumbs.  Fry  in  deep 
Crisco  until  delicate  brown,  drain 
them  a  moment,  arrange  neatly  on 
hot    dish    and    serve    with    tomato 


155 


A  Calendar  oj  Dinners 


sauce.  The  Crisco  should  be  heated 
until  crumb  of  bread  becomes  golden 
brown  in  40   seconds. 


January  28 

"Croutes,  a  la  Marie 

Oyster  Balls,  Horseradish  Sauce 

Potato  Souffle 

Baked  Cucumbers 

Nut  and  Celery  Salad 

Chocolate  Bavarian  Cream 

Coffee 

*Croutes,  a  la   Marie — Pass   1    small 

tureen    foie    gras    through    fine    wire 

sieve.    Put  in   basin,   add    1   teaspoon 

Crisco,  pepper  and  salt  to  taste,  and 

then  stir  in   gently   ^  a   gill    cream. 

Pipe  with  a    star  tube   on  to  round 

croute  of  short    crust;    garnish   with 

pimientoes  cut  in  strips  and  whipped 

cream. 

January  29 

Lobster  Canapes 
Cream  of  Oyster  Soup        Crackers 
Olives  Celery 

Planked  Shad,  Roe  Sauce 
Duchess  Potatoes 
Cucumbers,  French  Dressing 
^Cabinet  Pudding 
Coffee 
^Cabinet  Pudding — 8    stale   lady   fin- 
gers,   12    macaroons,    3    tablespoons 
cherries,    currants,    and    citron    peel 
chopped    fine,  1    tablespoon   sugar,  3 
eggs,  1  pint  milk,  2  teaspoons  Crisco, 
and  vanilla  extract. 

Decorate  bottom  of  mold  with 
some  fruit,  lay  row  macaroons  round 
edge  of  bottom.  Cut  ladyfingers  into 
pieces,  mix  with  fruit  and  loosely  fill 
mold.  Beat  eggs  with  little  cold  milk, 
and  2  teaspoons  Crisco,  scald  remain- 
der of  milk,  and  pour  on  to  eggs,beat- 
ing  at  the  same  time.  Sweeten  and 
flavor  to  taste.  Gently  pour  this  into 
mold.  Cover  with  Criscoed  paper 
and  place  in  steamer  to  cook  until  set. 
This  will  take  ^  of  an  hour.  Let 
pudding  stand  1  minute  or  1  before 
turning  out.  Serve  with  custard 
sauce. 


January  30 

*Croutes,  a  la  Rosamonde 
Roast  Tenderloin  of  Pork 
Sweet   Potatoes,  Southern  StyU 
Spinach,  a  la  Creme 
Parmesan  Cheese 
Apple  Salad 
Cranberry  Pie 
Coffee 
*Croutes,a  la  Rosamonde — Take  some 
small    round    tomatoes,    and    cut    in 
slices  yi  in<^h  thick.     Lay  in  dish  and 
sprinkle  with  melted  Crisco,  vinegar, 
pepper  and   salt.     Then   make  some 
round  croutes  of  short  paste  little  lar- 
ger than  tomato;  place  1  slice  tomato 
on  each,  1  rolled  fillet  anchovy  on  top, 
and   garnish  with   1   hard-cooked  egg 
yolk  and  small  piece  white  endive. 

January  31 

Spinach  Soup 

*Irish  Stew  Baked  Macaroni 

Onion  and  Lettuce  Salad 

Cheese  Puffs 

Golden  Parfait 

Coffee 

*Irish   Stew — 1    pound    middle    neck 

mutton,  2  pounds  potatoes,  4  onions, 

1  tablespoon  Crisco,  bunch  of  herbs, 

pepper  and   salt,   1   tablespoon  flour. 

1  teaspoon  chopped  parsley,  and  cold 

water. 

Put  Crisco  into  saucepan  with  mut- 
ton which  should  be  cut  into  small 
pieces.  Peel  and  quarter  onions,  and 
put  them  in  saucepan,  add  herbs  and 
barely  cover  with  cold  water.  Peel 
potatoes,  choose  small  ones  and  do 
not  cut  them  up,  and  lay  over  meat, 
sprinkle  little  salt  and  pepper  on  po- 
tatoes and  bring  to  boil.  Then  add 
flour  and  stand  saucepan  where  it  will 
stew  gently  2  hours.  Take  out  herbs, 
season  to  taste  with  salt  and  pepper. 
Dish  up  meat  in  circle  on  flat  dish, 
put  potatoes  and  onions  in  center, 
leaving  1  potato  in  saucepan,  to  mash 
and  thicken  the  gravy  a  little,  pour 
gravy  over  stew,  and  sprinkle  with 
parsley.  Inferior  cuts  of  mutton  can 
be  used  advantageously  for  this  dish, 


156 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


such  as  scrag-end  or  breast  of  mutton; 
the  bones  and  gristle  with  long  stew- 
ing give  a  nice  flavor  to  the  dish. 

February  1 

*Braised  Loin  of  Mutton  toith 

Mushrooms 

Boiled  Potatoes 

Spinach  Garnished  with  Hard-Cooked 

Spiced  Currants 

Carrot  Salad  Cofee  Jelly 

Coffee 

*Braised  Loin  of  Mutton  with  Mush- 
rooms— 3  pounds  loin  mutton,  1  stalk 
celery,  }4  teaspoon  whole  peppers, 
1  bunch  of  sweet  herbs,  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  pepper,  salt,  red  pepper,  1  tur- 
nip, 1  carrot,  2  or  3  cloves,  sprig  of 
parsley,  and  2  tablespoons  flour. 

Remove  bone  from  mutton,  thor- 
oughly rub  it  with  salt,  pepper,  and 
red  pepper;  roll  up  and  tie  into  roll; 
cut  up  celery,  onion,  carrot,  and  tur- 
nip, and  lay  them  at  bottom  of  stew- 
pan  with  sweet  herbs  and  parsley;  lay 
mutton  on  top  of  these,  and  pour 
round  enough  water  to  3  parts  cover 
it,  simmer  slowly  1>^  to  2  hours;  lift 
mutton  into  dripping  tin  with  few 
tablespoons  gravy;  set  in  brisk  oven 
until  brown;  strain  gravy  and  skim  off" 
fat,  put  Crisco  into  saucepan,  and 
when  brown,  add  flour,  and  brown 
also;  then  add  gravy  gradually,  little 
pepper  and  salt,  and  1  dozen  button 
mushrooms,  skinned;  boil  8  minutes; 
dish  mutton  with  mushrooms  round, 
and  gravy  strained  over. 

February  2 

*  Artichoke  Soup 

Fried  Fillets  of  Fish,  Sauce  Tartare 

Riced  Potatoes 

Onions  Stuffed  with  Nuts 

Egg  Salad         Toasted  Cheese 

Russian  Charlotte 

Coffee 

*  Artichoke  Soup — 2  pints  white  stock 
or  water,  1  pint  milk,  2  pounds  Jeru- 
salem artichokes,  2  onions,  1  bay  leaf, 
1  strip  celery,  2  tablespoons  Crisco, 
pepper  and  salt  to  taste. 


Wash  artichokes,  put  1  tablespoon 
vinegar  into  basin  of  water  and  keep 
artichokes  in  it  as  much  as  possible 
while  paring  them,  to  preserve  their 
whiteness.  Cut  onions,  bay  leaf,  cel- 
ery, and  artichokes  into  slices,  melt 
Crisco  in  stewpan,  fry  vegetables  10 
or  15  minutes  without  browning;  then 
pour  in  stock  and  boil  until  tender. 
Rub  through  fine  sieve,  return  to 
saucepan,  add  milk  and  seasoning, 
bring  to  boil  and  serve. 

When  a  thicker  soup  is  desired  1 
dessertspoon  of  cornstarch,  flour,  or 
a  mashed  potato  should  be  blended 
with  little  milk  or  stock,  and  added 
to  soup  a  few  minutes  before  serving. 

February  3 

Consomme  du  Barry 
Roast  Ribs  of  Beef 

*Franconia  Potatoes 
Corn  Cakes 
Mashed  Turnips 

Radish  Salad 
Marshmallow  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Franconia    Potatoes — Pare    10    med- 
ium-sized potatoes;  parboil  five  min- 
utes.      Place    on    grate    under    roast 
ribs    of    beef.       Baste    with     melted 
Crisco,    and    bake    from    20     to     30 
minutes,  turning  often. 

February  4 

Steamed  Oysters 
Lambs'  Tongues,  Tremont  Style 
Browned  Potatoes 
*  Anchovy  Fritters  Romaine  Salad 

Madeira  Jelly 
Coffee 
*Anchovy  Fritters — Pound  yolks  2 
hard- cooked  eggs  with  }4  dozen 
bottled  anchovies,  1  teaspoon  capers 
4  tablespoons  Crisco  and  4  table- 
spoons grated  Parmesan  cheese.  Rub 
all  through  fine  wire  sieve  and  add 
yolk  1  raw  egg  and  1  tablespoon 
breadcrumbs.  Season  with  pepper 
and  with  salt  if  it  is  needed. 

Form  paste  into  small  balls,  roll  first 
in  breadcrumbs,  then  in  egg  and  again 
in  crumbs,  and  drop  into  hot  Crisco. 
Serve  on  napkin  withgrated  Parmesan 


157 


Calendar  of  Dinners 


cheese.  The  recipe  as  here  given 
may  be  doubled,  and  "redoubled"  as 
many  times  as  it  is  thought  the  de- 
mand for  fritters  will  warrant. 

February  5 

Broiled  Smelts 

Chicken,  a  la  Florentine 

Brussels  Sprouts  with  Cheese 

Spanish  Salad  Cheese  Loaf 

*Date  Souffle 

Coffee 

*Daie  Souffle — Stone     and     chop     }4 

pound  dates   and    cook    them   in    ^ 

cup     boiling    water,     mashing    until 

smooth.      Add    1    tablespoon    melted 

Crisco,  stiffly  beaten  whites  5  eggs,  }4 

cup  sugar,  1  tablespoon  lemon  juice, 

and  salt  to  taste.     Pour  into  Criscoed 

souffle  mold  and  bake  until  brown,  or 

25  minutes.     Serve  cold  with  boiled 

custard  or  whipped  cream. 

February  6 

Rose  and  White  Radishes  with  Butter 

Cream  of  Mutton  Soup 

Baked  Bluefish,  Breslin  Style 

*  Planked  Chicken 

Jerusalem  Artichokes  Saute 

Apple  and  Cress  Salad 

Snow  Pudding  with  Chocolate  Sauce 

Coffee 
*Planked  Chicken — Cream  together 
yi  cup  Crisco,  1  teaspoon  minced 
onion,  J4  tablespoon  each  of  minced 
red  pepper,  green  pepper,  and  pars- 
ley, }^  clove  minced  garlic,  and  1  tea- 
spoon lemon  juice. 

Split  1  young  chicken  as  for  broil- 
ing, place  in  pan,  sprinkle  with  salt 
and  pepper,  dot  over  with  Crisco, 
and  bake  until  nearly  done  in  a  quick 
oven.  Then  Crisco  plank,  arrange 
upon  it  border  made  from  2  cups  of 
hot  mashed  potatoes  to  which  have 
been  added  seasoning  and  beaten 
yolks  of  3  eggs.  This  is  put  on  with 
a  pastry  tube  and  may  be  made  as 
fanciful  as  desired,  with  rosettes  and 
pyrarnids.  Brush  over  with  beaten 
egg  diluted  slightly  with  water,  and 
place  chicken  in  center.  Peel  and 
saute  8  large  mushroom  caps,  place  on 
chicken  (which  has  been  spread  with 


prepared  butter),  place  in  very  hot 
oven  to  brown  potatoes  and  finish 
cooking  chicken.  Serve  on  plank  at 
once. 

February  7 

Crab  Canapes 

St.  Germain  Soup 

*Braised  fillet   of  Beef 

French  Bean  Salad 

Bar-Le-Duc  Cream 
Fruits  Nuts 

Biscuits  Cheese  Coffee 
*Braised  Fillet  of  Beef— Tie  up  fillet  of 
beef  neatly  with  string  and  put  in 
stewpan,  bottom  of  which  has  been 
well  Criscoed  and  lined  with  thin 
slices  fat  bacon  and  2  sliced  onions. 
Cook  for  20  minutes,  then  barely 
cover  with  stock,  add  1  wineglass  of 
sherry,  and  bring  to  a  boil;  then  add  1 
small  onion  stuck  with  cloves,  1  small 
turnip,  1  carrot,  1  bouquet  of  herbs,  1 
tablespoon  Crisco,  salt  and  pepper  to 
taste. 

Let  meat  simmer  gently  in  this  for 
l}4  to  2  hours.  For  garnish,  take 
equal  quantities  of  French  peas  and 
string  beans,  artichoke  bottoms,  new 
carrots  and  turnips.  Cut  latter  in 
uniform  shapes  with  fancy  vegetable 
cutter,  and  cook  them  separate  in 
consomme.  Strain  oflF  about  ^  pint 
of  stock  from  fillet  of  beef,  and  pour 
on  brown  roux,  made  with  2  table- 
spoons each  of  flour  and  Crisco;  stir 
until  it  boils,  add  small  piece  of  glaze 
and  reduce  a  little  over  quick  fire. 
Add  dash  of  kitchen  bouquet,  salt, 
and  pepper.  Dish  up  fillet  of  beef, 
glaze  it  with  some  of  sauce,  and  ar- 
range vegetables  around  it  in  little 
heaps,  each  kind  separate.  Serve 
remainder  of  sauce  in  a  boat. 

February  8 

Faubonne  Soup 

Baked  Fish 

Grenadins  of  Feed 

Roast  Pigeons       Endive  Salad 

*Fruit  Snowballs 

Coffee 

*Fruit    Snowballs  —  Cream     yi    cup 

Crisco   with    ^   cup   sugar,    add    X 


158 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


cup  milk,  1  cup  flour,  1  teaspoon 
baking  powder,  and  3  stiffly  beaten 
egg  whites.  Mix  and  divide  into 
small  Criscoed  molds,  cover  with 
Crisv-oed  papers,  and  steam  35  min- 
utes. Turn  out,  sprinkle  with  pow- 
dered sugar,  garnish  with  candied 
cherries  and  pineapple  and  serve  with 
custard  sauce  made  with  egg  yolks. 

February  9 

Petite   Marmite 

*Goulash  of  Veal 

Cauliflower,  Cream  Sauce 

Braised  Endive  Orange  Salad 

Mousseline  Pudding 

Cofee 

*Goulash  of  Veal — \}4  pounds  lean 
veal,  1  pound  partly  cooked  new 
potatoes,  4  tablespoons  Crisco,  yi 
small  onion,  }4  pint  cream,  paprika, 
pepper,  and  salt.  Free  meat  from 
skin  and  sinews  and  cut  it  into  dice. 
Cut  potatoes  into  cubes.  Melt  Crisco 
in  saucepan,  add  meat  and  fry  lightly 
for  several  minutes,  add  onion,  finely 
chopped,  stir  over  fire  for  about  5 
minutes,  season  with  salt  and  pepper 
to  taste  and  add  potatoes.  Pour  off 
superfluous  fat,  mix  carefully  and 
moisten  with  cream  and  1  tablespoon 
rich  white  stock,  season  with  a  suf- 
ficiency of  paprika  pepper  to  give 
sauce  a  pink  tint,  and  cook  gently  for 
20  minutes.  It  is  best  to  cook  the 
Goulash  at  latter  stage  in  a  fireproof 
earthenware  stewpan,  in  which  it 
should  be  sent  to  table.  Great  care 
must  be  taken  so  as  not  to  break,  po- 
tatoes while  cooking.    Serve  very  hot. 


February  10 

Broiled  Beefsteak 

Baked  Potatoes        Creamed  Onions 

*  Waldorf  Salad 

Jellied  Figs  Nut  Cookies 

Coffee 

*Waldorf  Salad — 1  quart  chopped 
apples,  2  cups  diced  celery,  \}4  cups 
blanched  and  shredded  almonds, 
and  ^  cup  rolled  pecan  nut  meats. 


Dress  with  following  dressing, 
adding  little  more  sugar  and  lemon 
juice  to  taste,  just  before  serving. 
Mix  1  tablespoon  melted  Crisco,  1 
teaspoon  each  mustard  and  white 
sugar,  j4  teaspoon  salt  and  %  tea- 
spoon pepper.  Add  2  well  beaten 
egg  yolks  and  then  beat  in  slowly  4 
tablespoons  lemon  juice.  Cook  in 
double  boiler  till  it  thickens.  Then 
add  whites  2  eggs  beaten  stiff. 
Keep  on  ice  till  wanted.  Stir  in  1 
cup  whipped  cream  just  before  serv- 
ing. This  is  very  good  made  with 
S  egg  yolks  and  ^2  cup  thin  cream  if 
whipping  cream  is  unobtainable. 

February  11 

Cream  Soup 

Flounder  au  Gratin 

Veal  Cutlets,  Brown  Gravy 

Creamed  Potatoes 

Cauliflower  Polonaise 

Radish  Salad 

*Friar's  Omelet 

Coffee 

*Friar's    Omelet — Peel     and 
pound   cooking    apples,    and 
pulp    with    little    water    and 
When  nearly  cold  add   1   tablespoon 
Crisco  and  1  or  2  well  beaten  eggs. 

Crisco  a  pudding  dish  and  coat 
thickly  with  breadcrumbs.  Pour 
in  mixture  and  cover  thickly  with 
more  breadcrumbs.  Cook  in  oven  for 
^  of  an  hour.  A  little  lemon  peel 
can  be  added  if  liked. 


1 
to 
sugar. 


core 
boil 


February  12 

Gravy  Soup 

Fish  Souffle 

Beef  Olives 

Braised  Turnips  Carrots 

Potato  Puff 

Apple  and  Grapefruit  Salad 

*Coburg  Pudding 

Cofee 

*Coburg  Pudding — 3  cups  milk,  K 
cup  rice,  1  cup  boiling  water,  1  egg,  4 
tablespoons  sugar,  1  teaspoon  pow- 
dered cinnamon,  1  tablespoon  Crisco, 
and  yi  teaspoon  salt. 

159 


A  Calendar  oj  Dinners 


Well  wash  rice,  sprinkle  it  into 
boiling  water  and  cook  gently  until 
all  water  is  absorbed.  Heat  milk,  in 
double  saucepan  if  possible,  add  half- 
cooked  rice  and  boil  gently  until  it  is 
perfectly  soft  and  of  thick  creamy 
consistency.  Should  it  become  too 
thick  before  it  is  really  soft,  add  more 
milk.  Beat  egg,  until  very  light, 
add  half  sugar  to  it.  When  rice  is 
cooked,  whisk  egg  in  at  once,  a  little 
at  a  time.  Then  add  salt  and  piece  of 
Crisco  size  of  walnut.  Turn  mix- 
ture into  dish  in  which  it  is  to  be 
served.  Mix  rest  of  sugar  with 
cinnamon.  Sprinkle  this  evenly  over 
top  of  rice.  Put  rest  of  Crisco  in 
small  pieces  over  top  of  pudding  just 
before  it  is  required.  Place  pudding 
in  front  of  fire,  or  in  oven  for  second 
or  two,  when  Crisco,  etc.,  will  form  a 
delicious  sauce  over  surface  of  pud- 
ding. 

February  13 

*Bombay  Toast 

Boiled  Halibut,  Lobster  Sauce 

Roast  Capon         Beet  and  Potato  Salad 

Cheese  Ramekins 

Peach  Border 

Cofee 

*Bombay     Toast — Fry    the     required 

number  of  croutes  in  Crisco.     When 

cold    spread    with    paste   of  pounded 

chicken     and     cream.       Chop     some 

capers,  and  lay  in  a  thick  line  across 

the  chicken  paste.     On  one-half  put 

grated   yolk  of  hard-cooked   egg,  on 

the   other   half  put   grated   white   of 

hard-cooked  egg,   and  serve. 


February  14 

Cupid  Canapes 

Clam  Bouillon 
Fillets  of  Fish 
*Supreme  of  Chicken 
Martinique  Potatoes  Spinach 

Kumquat  and  Celery  Salad 
Tutti  Frutti  Ice  Cream  Mints 

Cofee 
^Supreme  of  Chicken — Remove  breast 
meat  from  2  young  chickens  and  trim 


into  shape.  Sprinkle  with  salt  and 
pepper,  dip  in  cream,  roll  in  flour  and 
saute  in  Crisco  until  delicately 
browned.  Place  in  small  pan,  dot  over 
with  Crisco,  and  bake  until  tender. 
Remove  to  cutlet-shaped  pieces  of 
hot  boiled  ham  (cut  very  thin),  gar- 
nish top  of  each  with  3  short  stalks 
of  asparagus,  seasoned  with  Crisco, 
and  pour  around  following  sauce: 
Melt  3>^  tablespoons  Crisco,  add 
'iyi  tablespoons  flour,  and  stir  until 
well  blended;  then  pour  on  gradually 
while  stirring  constantly  1  cup 
chicken  stock  and  yi  cup  cream. 
Bring  to  boiling  point,  season  with 
salt  and  paprika,  and  add  yolk  of  1  egg. 

February  15 

Swedish  Soup        Poached  Eggs  on  Top 

Stuffed  Breast  of  Veal 

Stewed  Tomatoes       Fried  Carrots 

*  Apple  Tartlets 

Coffee 

*Apple    Tartlets — Line    some    tartlet 

tins   with   Crisco   pastry.      Fill   with 

stewed  apples  to  which  a  little  melted 

Crisco  and  grated  nutmeg  have  been 

added.     Cover  with  a  meringue  and 

brown  in  the  oven  for  a  few  minutes. 

February  16 

Consomme  Colbert 

Braised  Mutton  Cutlets  with  Kidneys 

Stuffed  Potatoes     *Salsify  FritUrs 

Spinach  Salad 

Cheese  Balls 

Meringues,  a  la  ChantiUy 

Coffee 

*Salsify     Fritters — 3     heads     salsify, 

lemon  juice,  salt,  2  tablespoons  milk, 

1    tablespoon    melted    Crisco,    fried 

parsley,   4   tablespoons   flour,   and   2 

eggs.      Wash,   scrape,    and   soak   the 

salsify  in   cold   water  seasoned   with 

salt  and  lemon  juice  to  taste.     Boil 

in     salted,     acidulated     water     until 

tender.    Take  it  up  when  done,  drain, 

and  cut  the  salsify  into  pieces  all  the 

same   size.      Sieve   the   flour   into   a 

basin,  work  in  the  yolks  of  the  eggs, 

the    milk,    and    the    melted    Crisco. 

Beat  to  a  smooth  batter,  season  with 

salt  and  pepper  to  taste.    When  ready 


160 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


to  fry,  beat  up  the  whites  of  eggs 
very  stiffly  and  stir  them  lightly  into 
batter.  Drop  the  salsify  into  the 
batter,  then  into  hot  Crisco  and  fry  to 
a  golden  brown  color.  Take  up,  drain, 
and  serve  garnished  with  fried  parsley. 

February  17 

Strained  Gumbo 
Oyster  Souffle 
*Calf's  Head,  Vinaigrette 
Baked  Eggplant  String  Beans 

Russian  Salad  Ambrosia 

Coffee 
*Calfs  Head,  Vinaigrette — Clean  and 
scald  y^  a  calf's  head.  Cover  with 
water  and  boil  ^  an  hour,  then 
plunge  into  cold  water.  When  cool, 
remove  meat  and  cut  in  small  squares. 
Make  a  roux  of  1  tablespoon  Crisco 
and  2  tablespoons  flour  cooked  thor- 
oughly; add  4  cloves,  3  whole  peppers, 
small  onion,  carrot,  2  bay  leaves, 
dash  of  thyme,  and  2  tablespoons 
strong  vinegar.  Add  the  meat. 
Simmer  2  hours;  remove  into  deep 
dish  and  cover  with  vinaigrette  sauce, 
which  is  made  with  ^  teaspoon  salt, 
yi  teaspoon  paprika,  dash  white  pep- 
per mixed  with  3  tablespoons  tarragon 
or  plain  vinegar.  Add  6  tablespoons 
olive  oil,  1  tablespoon  gherkins,  and 
1  teaspoon  each  chives  and  parsley  all 
chopped  very  fine,  and  1  tablespoon 
minced  green  pepper.  Blend  well  be- 
fore pouring  over  meat.  This  may  be 
served  either  hot  or  cold.  Garnish  with 
cucumber  pickles  cut  into  fan  shapes. 

February  18 

*Cheese  Canapes 

Lamb  Chops 

French  Peas  Baked  Potatoes 

Artichoke  Salad 

Russian  Charlotte        Preserved  Ginger 

Coffee 
*Cheese  Canapes — 8  croutes  bread,  }i 
pound  cheese,  2  tablespoons  Crisco, 
salt  and  red  pepper  to  taste,  1  tea- 
spoon mustard,  and  1  dessertspoon 
sherry. 

Cut  the  croutes  of  bread  out  of 
slices  of  stale  bread  with  a  round 
rutter    2    inches    across.      Fry    the 


bread  a  golden  color  in  hot  Crisco. 
Cut  up  cheese;  put  it  into  a  mortar 
with  Crisco,  and  pound  until  it 
becomes  a  smooth  paste;  then  season 
with  salt  and  red  pepper  to  taste. 
Add  the  mustard  and  sherry.  When 
all  ingredients  are  thoroughly  mixed, 
put  it  on  the  croutes  of  bread;  place 
them  in  oven  until  hot  through,  then 
serve  at  once. 

February  19 

*Mulligatawney  Soup 
Roast  Pork,  Frozen  Apple  Sauce 
Potatoes       Creamed  Onions 

Indian  Salad 
Toasted  Biscuits  Cheese 

Mocha  Souffle 
Coffee 
*Mulligatatoney  Soap^Saute  in  1 
tablespoon  melted  Crisco,  1  minced 
onion,  1  tablespoon  minced  cooked 
ham,  3  cloves,  J4  carrot,  and  1  stick 
celery,  minced  fine,  ^  cup  cooked 
chicken  cut  in  dice,  and  3  pints  of 
chicken  stock.  Cook  fifteen  min- 
utes, add  yi  a  green  apple,  diced,  yi 
cup  stewed  or  canned  tomatoes,  1 
teaspoon  tomato  catsup,  1  teaspoon 
curry  powder,  2  tablespoons  boiled 
rice,  1  teaspoon  salt,  and  2  drops 
Tabasco  sauce.  Simmer  }4  hour 
and  serve  with  or  without  thin  slices 
of  lemon  cut  in  quarters. 

February  20 

*Onion  Cocktail 

Halibut,  a  la  Martin 

Roast  Mutton,  Currant  Mint  Sauce 

Okra  and  Tomatoes 

Cucumber  Jelly  Salad 

Spanish  Cream  Coffee 

*Onion  Cocktail — 2  cups  diced  apples, 

1  cup  diced  onions,  1  cup  seeded 
raisins.  Fill  cocktail  glasses  with 
onions,  apples,  raisins,  pour  over  a 
sour  dressing  made  as  follows:  ^  cup 
each  of  vinegar  and  water,  1  table- 
spoon Crisco,  salt  and  red  pepper  to 
taste,  and  2  teaspoons  sugar.  Place 
in  small  saucepan  over  fire  until  Crisco 
melts,  then  stir  in  well  beaten  yolks  of 

2  eggs,  stirring  constantly  until  thick. 
Place  in  ice  box  to  cool  before  using. 


161 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


February  21 

Boiled  Halibut,  Anchovy  Butter 

Pigeons,  a  la  Chasseur 

Criddled  IVhite  Potatoes 

*Stezved  Lettuce 

Oyster  Salad        Cheese  Relish 

Pineapple  Cream 

Cofee 

*Stewed  Lettuce — Wash     the     desired 

number  of  heads  of  lettuce,  cutting 

off  the  stalks  at  the  roots,  and  put 

into  a  saucepan  with  1  onion  sliced,' 

1    tablespoon    Crisco,    1    tablespoon 

chopped  parsley,  and  salt  and  pepper 

to  taste,  with  a  very  little  water,  to 

cook   slowly   for   2    hours.      By   this 

time   the   water   should   have   pretty 

well  cooked  away,  leaving  the  lettuce 

fairly    dry.       Remove    from    it    the 

onion   and   parsley,   put  into  a  dish, 

dress   well    with    melted    butter    and 

send  to  table  hot. 


February  22 

Cherry  Cocktail 

Olives         Salted  Nuts         Oyster  Soup 

Fried  Chicken,  Cream  Gravy 

Peas  Sweet  Potatoes 

White  Grape  Salad         Beaten  Biscuits 

*  Washington  Pie 

Martha  Washington  Fruit  Cake 

Fruit  Punch 

Coffee 

*Washington  Pie — ^    cup    sugar,    1 

tablespoon     Crisco;     beat     together 

thoroughly;  add  )4  cup  sweet  milk,  2 

cups  flour,  2  beaten  eggs,  2  teaspoons 

baking    powder,    1    teaspoon    lemon; 

make  into  3  cakes  and  put  jelly  or 

custard  between. 

February  23 

Red  Cabbage  Soup 
*Broiled  Kidneys  with  Green  Peppers 

French  Peas       Fried  Bananas 
Grapefruit  and  White  Grape  Salad 
Cheese  Balls 

Russian  Jelly 
Coffee 
*Broiled  Kidneys  with  Green  Peppers 
— Split   some   fine   beef  kidneys,   re- 
move the  outer  skin  and  sinews,  and 


wipe  well.  Sprinkle  the  kidneys 
with  pepper  and  salt,  and  let  stand 
for  an  hour  or  nriore.  Dip  them  then, 
into  melted  Crisco  and  broil  over  a 
clear  fire.  Meanwhile,  chop  2  green 
peppers,  freed  from  their  seeds,  and 
fry  with  yi  a  teaspoon  chopped  onion 
and  1  tablespoon  chopped  parsley  in 
Crisco  till  the  pepper  is  quite  done, 
having  no  more  moisture,  or  Crisco 
that  is  in  the  pan,  than  is  necessary 
to  cook  the  green  peppers.  Dish  the 
kidneys  and  surround  with  the  sauce 
of  green  peppers. 

Vegetarian 

February  24 

Cream  of  Celery  Soup 

*Mock  Veal  Roast         Stewed  Turnips 

Asparagus  Salad 

Cheese  Crackers 

Apple  Pie 

Coffee 

*Mock    Veal   Roast — yi    pint   shelled 

roasted    peanuts,    yi    pint   lentils,    2 

tablespoons    melted    Crisco,    yi    pint 

toasted    breadcrumbs,    milk,    pepper 

and  salt  to  taste. 

Soak  the  lentils  over  night;  drain, 
bring  them  to  a  boil;  throw  away 
water;  cover  with  fresh  water  and 
boil  until  tender;  drain  again;  press 
them  through  a  colander.  Add  nuts, 
chopped  or  ground,  melted  Crisco, 
breadcrumbs  and  seasoning,  with 
sufficient  milk  to  make  it  the  con- 
sistency of  mush.  Pour  into  baking 
dish  and  bake  in  a  moderate  oven  1 
hour.  Beans  or  peas  may  be  sub- 
stituted for  lentils. 

February  25 

Clam  Broth  with  Whipped  Cream 

Boiled  Fish       Dressed  Cucumbers 

Panned  Chicken 

Riced  Potatoes  *Stuffed  Green  Peppers 

Celery  and  Lettuce  Salad 

Caramel  Rice  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Stuffed  Green  Peppers — 6  large  green 

peppers,  1  pint  boiled  rice,  I  tomato, 

1  tablespoon  Crisco,  1  medium-sized 

onion,  and  1  teaspoon  salt.     Cut  the 


162 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


tops  from  peppers  and  remove  seeds. 
Add  to  rice  the  onion  and  tomato, 
chopped  and  salt.  Wash  peppers, 
stuff  them  with  boiled  rice,  put  on 
tops  and  stand  them  in  a  baking 
pan.  Cover  bottom  of  baking  pan 
with  a  little  water;  add  to  it  the 
Crisco.  Bake  in  a  quick  oven  20 
minutes,  basting  2  or  3  times. 

February  26 

Cream  of  Beet  Soup 
Pork  Tenderloins,  Apple  Sauce 
Baked  and  Glazed  Potatoes 
Buttered  Parsnips 
*Raisin  Pudding,  Liquid  Sauce 
Coffee 
*Raisin   Pudding — Wash  and    dry   1 
pound  Sultana  raisins;  Crisco  a  pud- 
ding dish;  put   in  a   layer  of  boiled 
rice,  over  it  a  layer  of    raisins,  and 
continue  until  the  dish  is  nearly  full, 
having  rice  on  top.    Beat  2  eggs;  add 
2  teaspoons  sugar,  1  pinch  of  salt,  3 
tablespoons  melted  Crisco,  and  2  cups 
sweet  milk;  pour  it  over  pudding, and 
bake  K  hour.  Serve  with  liquid  sauce. 

February  27 

Sago  Soup 
Brown  Stew  of  Mutton  Chops 
Stewed  Turnips  Boiled  Potatoes 

*Cabbage  Salad 
Lemon  Sponge  Coffee 

*Cahbage  Salad — Shave  2  cups  shred- 
ded cabbage  in  thin  strips  or  chop 
fine  and  mix  with  the  following 
dressing:  2  tablespoons  Crisco,  }4 
cup  hot  vinegar,  1  teaspoon  dry 
mustard,  1  tablespoon  sugar,  1  tea- 
spoon salt,  >^  teaspoon  pepper,  14 
onion,  cut  fine,  and  yi  cup  sweet  or 
sour  cream,  milk  or  water.  Dissolve 
the  sugar  in  cream.  Mix  with  rest  of 
the  ingredients.  Mix  while  hot  and 
serve  with  the  salad  slightly  warmed. 

February  28 

Consomme  with  Spaghetti 

*Chicken  Souffle         Creamed  Potatoes 

Celery  and  Apple  Salad 

Stuffed  Dates  Coffee 

*Chicken   Souffle — 2   cups   cold   roast 

chicken,   a   }4   ^up   ^^^^   boiled   ham 


or  tongue,  5  tablespoons  Crisco,  2 
tablespoons  flour,  >^  cup  cream,  K 
cup  chicken  broth,  a  }4  cup  chop- 
ped nut  meats,  salt  and  paprika 
to  taste,  and  4  eggs  beaten  sepa- 
rately. 

The  chicken,  ham  or  tongue  should 
be  chopped  very  fine  before  measur- 
ing. Melt  3  tablespoons  Crisco  in  a 
frying  pan;  add  the  chopped  meat 
and  stir  over  fire  until  Crisco  is 
absorbed.  .Make  a  sauce  of  2  table- 
spoons Crisco,  the  flour,  broth  and 
cream.  Pound  the  meat  in  a  mortar, 
adding  meanwhile  the  sauce.  Press 
the  whole  through  a  fine  sieve;  add 
the  nut  meats,  seasonings  and  yolks 
of  eggs.  Mix  thoroughly,  and  fold 
in  the  whites  of  eggs.  Bake  in  a 
Criscoed  dish  till  firm  in  the  center. 
Serve  with  mushroom  or  tomato 
sauce.  This  may  also  be  cooked  in 
individual  dishes.  25  minutes  will 
be  needed  for  cooking  in  a  large  dish, 
about  12  minutes  in  individual  dishes. 
It  is  better  to  cook  a  souffle  too  long 
than  too  short  a  time  always,  pro- 
vided that  the  temperature  be  kept 
about  208°  F. 

March  1 

*Toad  in  the  Hole 

Pressed  Beef  with  Aspic 

Beet  and  Endive  Salad 

Compote  of  Fruit,  Maids  of  Honor 

Coffee 

*Toad  in  the  Ilole — 2  cups  flour,  }4 
teaspoon  salt,  1  pound  link  sausages, 
2  eggs,  2  tablespoons  melted  Crisco, 
and  3  cups  milk.  Sift  the  flour  and 
salt  into  a  basin;  beat  up  eggs  well, 
and  after  mixing  them  with  the  milk 
and  melted  Crisco,  pour  gradually 
on  flour,  beating  it  well  with  a 
wooden  spoon.  When  quite  smooth, 
pour  it  into  a  well  Criscoed  fire- 
proof dish;  skin  the  sausages  and 
lay  them  in  the  batter,  and  bake  in  a 
moderate  oven  for  ^  of  an  hour. 
Serve  in  small  squares  arranged 
neatly  overlapping  each  other  on  a 
hot  dish. 


163 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


March  2 

*Oxtail  Soup 

Trout,  Black  Butter  Sauce 

Stewed  Steak  and  Oysters 

Pear  Salad 

Cheese  Eclairs 

Sweet  Omelet 

Coffee 

*Oxtail  Soup — 1  oxtail,  2  quarts 
second  stock  or  water,  2  onions,  2 
carrots,  1  turnip,  2  strips  celery,  4 
tablespoons  Crisco,  a  ^cup  diced 
lean  ham  or  bacon,  a  bouquet-garni, 
12  whole  peppers,  2  cloves,  salt,  1 
glass  sherry,  and  1  tablespoon  corn- 
starch. 

Cut  the  tail  into  small  joints,  put 
it  into  a  stewpan,  cover  with  cold 
water,  boil  up  and  strain.  Dry  the 
pieces  of  oxtail,  roll  them  in  flour, 
put  them  with  ham  and  sliced  vege- 
tables and  Crisco  into  the  stewpan, 
and  fry  until  brown.  Then  add 
stock,  herbs,  whole  peppers,  cloves, 
.and  salt,  boil  and  skim  well.  Put 
on  lid  and  cook  very  gently  for  about 
4  hours.  Strain,  remove  fat,  return 
to  stewpan,  and  when  soup  boils  add 
sherry  and  cornstarch  smoothly  mix- 
ed together,  stir  and  cook  for  a  few 
minutes.  Serve  smaller  pieces  of 
tail  in  soup,  remainder  may  be  re- 
heated in  a  good  brown  sauce,  and 
used  as  an  entree. 

Vegetarian 

March  3 

*Grilled  Mushrooms 
Vegetable  Soup 

Cheese  Omelet 
Baked  Beans 

Iced  Asparagus 
Fruit  in  Jelly 
Coffee 

*Grilled  Mushrooms — 1  cup  mush- 
rooms, pepper  and  salt  to  taste,  Cris- 
co, and  lemon  juice.  Carefully  peel 
the  mushrooms,  cut  off  a  portion  of 
stalk,  and  season  with  salt.  Broil 
them  over  a  clear  fire,  turning  them 
once,  and  arrange  them  on  a  very 
hot  dish.    Put  a  small  piece  of  Crisco 


on  each  mushroom,  season  with  pep- 
per and  salt  to  taste,  and  squeeze 
over  them  a  few  drops  of  lemon 
juice. 

March  4 

Spanish  Soup 

*Baked  Stuffed  Heart 

Mashed  Potatoes        Fried  Beets 

Red  Cabbage  Salad 

Orange  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Baked  Stuffed  Heart — Take  an  ox 
heart  and  season  it  inside  with  salt 
and  pepper,  and  fill  it  quite  full  of 
herb  forcemeat;  fasten  it  up  with  a 
needle  and  string,  rub  the  heart  over 
well  with  melted  Crisco  and  fold  it 
up  in  a  well  Criscoed  paper;  tie  it  up, 
put  heart  in  a  baking  tin  in  the  oven, 
keeping  it  well  basted  with  melted 
Crisco,  then  remove  the  paper  and 
dish  upon  a  hot  dish,  and  serve  round 
it  a  good  brown  sauce  or  tomato 
sauce  or  brown  caper  sauce,  and  gar- 
nish ,  with  olive  potatoes.  This 
should  be  served  while  hot. 

March  5 

*Scotch  Broth 

Browned  Veal   Knuckle 

Riced  Potatoes       Buttered  Parsnips 

Olive  and  Lettuce  Salad 

Cheese  Straws 

Apricot  Parfait 

Coffee 

^Scotch  Broth — 2  pounds  neck  mut- 
ton, 1  cup  barley,  1  cup  peas,  1  car- 
rot, 1  turnip,  1  teaspoon  sugar,  3 
onions  or  leeks,  1  tablespoon  Crisco, 
1  small  cabbage,  1  tablespoon  chop- 
ped parsley,  16  cups  water  or  stock, 
salt  and  pepper  to  taste. 

Prepare  vegetables  and  cut  them 
into  small  pieces.  Put  water  or  stock 
into  large  earthenware  pan,  and  when 
it  boils,  add  meat  and  barley.  Boil 
up,  skimming  frequently,  add  vege- 
tables, and  then  simmer  for  3  hours. 
Now  stir  in  one  extra  carrot  grated, 
salt  and  pepper,  sugar  and  Crisco. 
Simmer  again  for  30  minutes.  Add 
parsley  and  broth  is  ready  to  serve. 


164 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Vegetarian 

March  6 

Spinach  Soup 

*Egg  Cutlets,  Cream  Sauce 

Potatoes  Brussels  Sprouts 

Tomatoes,  French  Dressing 

Cheese  Fingers 
Sultana  Pudding  Cofee 

*Egg  Cutlets — Put  2  tablespoons  Cris- 
co  into  a  pan,  when  melted,  add  2 
tablespoons  flour,  1  cup  milk  grad- 
ually, boil  for  3  minutes,  stirring  all 
the  time,  then  add  2  raw  yolks  of 
eggs,  remove  from  the  fire,  add  2 
tablespoons  cooked  chopped  peppers, 
6  chopped  mushrooms,  red  pepper, 
white  pepper,  salt  and  nutmeg  to 
taste  and  four  chopped  hard-cooked 
eggs.  Turn  on  plate  to  cool.  Shape 
into  cutlets.  Brush  over  with  beaten 
egg,  roll  in  fine  breadcrumbs  and  fry 
in  hot  Crisco.  Serve  very  hot  with 
cream  sauce. 

March  7 

*Tapioca  Puree 

Brazilian   Stew 

Beans  Mashed  Potatoes 

White  Grape  Salad 

Wafers  Cheese 

Ginger  Ice  Cream  Cofee 

*Tapioca  Puree — 1  quart  white  stock, 

or  half  stock  and  half  milk,  X  pint 

cream,    1   tablespoon   melted   Crisco, 

yolks  of  3  eggs,  1  tablespoon  fine  sago 

or  crushed  tapioca,  salt  and   pepper 

to  taste. 

The  stock  should  be  well  flavored, 
otherwise  it  must  be  simmered  with  a 
little  onion,  carrot,  celery,  and  herbs, 
and  strained  for  use.  Bring  stock  to 
boiling  point,  sprinkle  in  sago,  or 
tapioca,  and  stir  and  cook  until  it 
becomes  transparent;  then  let  soup 
cool  slightly.  Mix  yolks  of  eggs  and 
the  cream  together,  then  the  melted 
Crisco,  and  add  to  soup  and  stir  till 
it  thickens;  it  should  have  the  con- 
sistency of  single  cream.  When  a 
thicker  soup  is  desired,  mix  teaspoon 
flour  or  cornstarch  with  a  little  milk, 
and  add  it  to  soup  at  same  time  as 
sago  or  tapioca.  Season  to  taste,  and 
serve. 


March  8 

Turnip  Soup  ' 

Beef  Stew  with  Dumplings 

Parsnips  Mashed  Potatoes 

Russian  Salad 

Cheese  Crackers 

*Bird's  Nest  Pudding  Coffee 

*Bird's  Nest  Pudding — 3  eggs,  K  cup 
flour,  6  tablespoons  Crisco,  ^  cup 
sugar,  ya  cup  blanc-mange,  pinch 
baking  powder,  pistachio  nuts  or 
cocoanut,  angelica  and  apricot  jam. 

Break  eggs  into  basin,  add  sugar 
to  them,  and  beat  over  saucepan  of 
hot  water  until  mixture  is  consis- 
tency of  thick  cream.  Melt  Crisco; 
sieve  flour  and  baking  powder  to- 
gether. Stir  Crisco  and  flour  quick- 
jy  and  lightly  into  egg  mixture,  turn 
into  well-criscoed  mold,  and  bake  in  a 
moderate  oven  for  15  to  20  minutes. 
Turn  out  when  done,  and  let  the  cake 
get  cold.  Rub  some  apricot  jam 
through  a  hair  sieve,  put  a  thin 
layer  of  this  over  the  cake,  roll  it 
either  in  chopped  pistachio  nuts  or 
desiccated  cocoanut.  Stand  on  a 
dish.  Have  ready  some  blanc-mange 
eggs,  fill  the  center  with  these,  and 
arrange  round  the  base  of  the  nest 
some  pieces  of  angelica  to  represent 
twigs.  It  is  now  ready  to  serve. 
The  blanc-mange  eggs  are  made  by 
either  filling  some  egg-molds  with 
blanc-mange,  or  by  emptying  out 
some  eggs,  and  using  the  shells. 
The  eggs  must  ce  emptied  through  as 
small  a  hole  as  possible.  When  set, 
the  shells  are  broken  away  carefully. 

March  9 

*Feal  and  Ham  Pie 

Baked  Sweet  Potatoes     Fried  Parsnips 

Salad  of  Canned  Asparagus  Tips 

Cheese  Fritters 
Caramel  Pudding  with  Meringue 
Cofee 
*FeaI    and    Ham    Pie — lyi    pounds 
veal,  2  hard-cooked   eggs,  few  grains 
red  pepper,  dust  of  powdered  mace, 
}/3    teaspoon   grated   lemon   rind,   ^ 
pound    ham,    1    tablespoon    flour,    1 
teaspoon     salt,     6     whole     peppers, 
powdered  sweet  herbs,  and  pastry. 


165 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Cut  veal  and  ham  into  very  thin 
pieces;  mik  on  a  plate,  flour,  salt, 
pepper,  sweet  herbs,  lemon  rind,  red 
pepper,  and  mace,  roll  in  this  season- 
ing each  piece  of  veal,  and  lay  in  a 
pie  dish,  alternately,  layers  of  veal, 
ham,  and  egg,  cut  in  slices;  pile 
this  in  center  of  dish,  add  >^  cup 
water;  line  edge  of  dish,  cover  and 
decorate  with  Crisco  Flake  Pastry; 
when  baked  add  a  little  very  good 
seasoned  stock,  which  should  be- 
come a  jelly  when  the  pie  is  cold,  or  a 
little  gelatine  may  be  added;  garnish 
with  parsley  if  served  cold. 

March  10 

Cream  of  Cabbage  Soup 
Celery  Olives 

*  Halibut,  a  la  Poulette,  White  Sauce 
Baked  Potatoes 
Macaroni,  Italian  Style 
Chicory  Salad       Cheese  Crusts 
Plum  Pudding  Coffee 

*Halibut,  a  laPoulette — Slice  of  halibut, 
weighing  2  pounds, >^  cup  melted  Cris- 
co, 2  teaspoons  lemon  juice,  few  drops 
onion  juice,  pepper  and  salt  to  taste. 
Clean  fish  and  cut  into  neat  fillets. 
Add  seasonings  to  melted  Crisco, 
and  put  dish  containing  Crisco  in 
saucepan  of  hot  water  to  keep  Crisco 
melted.  Take  up  each  fillet  sep- 
arately with  a  fork,  dip  in  Crisco, 
roll  and  fasten  with  small  wooden 
skewer.  Put  in  shallow  pan,  dredge 
with  flour,  and  bake  12  minutes  in 
hot  oven.  Remove  skewers,  arrange 
on  platter  for  serving,  pour  around 
\}4  cups  white  sauce,  and  garnish 
with  yolks  of  2  hard-  cooked  eggs 
rubbed  through  a  strainer,  whites 
of  hard -cooked  eggs  cut  in  strips, 
lemon  cut  fan-shaped,  and  parsley. 

March  11 

Asparagus  Soup 

Baked  Salmon,  Hollandaise  Sauce 

Mashed  Potatoes  *Spinach,  a  la  Creme 

Escarole  Salad  Cheese  Straws 

Cocoanut  Pudding  Coffee 

*Spinach,    a    la     Creme — 2     pounds 

spinach,  pepper,  salt,  and  nutmeg  to 

taste,   2   tablespoons   Crisco,   ^  cup 

thick  cream,  and  1  teaspoon  sugar. 


Wash  and  pick  spinach,  throw  it 
into  a  pan  of  boiling  water  contain- 
ing a  little  salt  and  soda;  boil  until 
tender,  10  to  15  minutes;  pour  on  to  a 
wire  sieve,  and  squeeze  out  ail  the 
water;  rub  through  the  sieve  with  a 
wooden  spoon;  put  spinach  into  a 
saucepan,  with  seasoning,  butter, 
and  cream.  The  spinach  may  be 
prepared  as  above  and  mixed  with 
white  sauce  instead  of  cream;  garnish 
with  fried  croutons, 

March  12 

Porterhouse  Steak,  Maitre  d*  Hotel  Butter 
French  Fried  Potatoes 
Stewed  Tomatoes 
Shredded  Cabbage,  Cream  Dressing 
*  Apple  Pie     Cheese      Coffee 
*  Apple  Pie — Use  Crisco  Plain  Paste. 
For  filling  for  a  medium-sized  pie  tin, 
use  3  cups  pared  and  sliced  apples, 
yi    cup    sugar,    yi    teaspoon    salt,    1 
tablespoon   Crisco,    %   teaspoon   cin- 
namon,   1    tablespoon    lemon    juice, 
and  grated  rind  of  yi  lemon. 

March  13 

Baked  Stuffed  Haddock 
Julienne  Potatoes   Creamed  Cucumbers 

Egg  Salad 
*SteamedGraham  Pudding,  HardSauce 

Coffee 
*Steamed  Graham  Pudding — }4  cup 
molasses,  >^  cup  milk,  1  egg,  X  cup 
Crisco,  l}4  cups  graham  flour,  yi 
teaspoon  soda,  1  teaspoon  sa|t,  1  cup 
stoned  and  chopped  dates. 

Melt  Crisco,  add  molasses,  milk, 
egg  well  beaten,  dry  ingredients, 
mixed  and  sifted,  and  dates;  turn 
into  Criscoed  mold,  cover,  and  steam 
2y^  hours.  Serve  with  hard  sauce. 
Figs  cut  in  small  pieces  may  be  used 
in  place  of  dates. 

March  14 

*Breaded  Chops 
Baked  Potatoes  Celery  Hearts 

Creamed  Carrots  and  Peas 
Lettuce,  French  Dressing 
Apricot  Whip,  Custard  Sauce     Coffee 
*Breaded  Chops — Wipe  and  trim  mut- 
ton   chops,    sprinkle    with    salt    and 


166 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


pepper,  dip  in  crumbs,  egg,  then 
crumbs,  and  fry  in  hot  Crisco  from 
5  to  8  minutes,  then  drain.  Do  not 
fry  more  than  4  chops  at  a  time, 
and  allow  the  Crisco  to  reheat  be- 
tween fryings.  After  testing  Crisco 
for  temperature  put  in  the  chops, 
then  lower  the  heat  that  the  surface 
of  the  chops  may  not  be  burned  while 
the  inside  is  yet  under  done. 

March  15 

*Sardine  Canapes 

Baked  Beans 

Baked  Potatoes 

Apple  and  Celery  Salad 

Cheese  Wafers 

Date  Cream  Pie 

Cofee 

*Sardine  Canapes — Take  6  or  8 
sardines,  mash  up  with  yolk  of  a 
hard-cooked  egg,  pepper  and  salt  to 
taste,  a  little  lemon  juice  and  1  tea- 
spoon melted  Crisco.  Have  some 
rounds  of  bread  fried  a  pretty  golden 
brown  color  in  hot  Crisco,  spread 
the  mixture  on  the  croutes;  garnish 
round  the  edges  with  some  finely 
chopped  parsley  and  white  of  1 
egg  rubbed  through  sieve. 

March  16 

*Clam  Bisque         Crackers 

Codfish  Balls 

Escalloped  Tomatoes 

Cucumber  Salad 

Bermuda  Onions 

Custard  Pie 

Coffee 

*Clam  Bisque — 2  cups  clams,  2  table- 
spoons chopped  onions,  bit  of  bay  leaf, 
3  tablespoons  Crisco,  4  tablespoons 
flour,  2  cups  chicken  stock,  1  tea- 
spoon salt,  pepper  and  red  pepper 
to  taste,  1  pint  hot  cream,  and  1 
teaspoon   Worcestershire    Sauce. 

Chop  clams,  and  cook  in  stock 
20  minutes.  Melt  Crisco,  add  onions, 
cook  5  minutes;  add  flour,  strained 
clam  liquor,  cook  5  minutes;  add 
seasonings,  cream,  and  serve. 


March  17 

Irish  Potato  Bisque 

Olives 

Salted  Pistachio  Nuts 

*Boiled  Salmon,  Parsley  Sauce 

Mashed  Potatoes 

Brussels  Sprouts 

Shamrock  Salad 

St.  Patrick's  Pie 

Green  Frosted  Cakes 

Green  Mints 

Coffee 

*Boiled  Salmon — Put  the  salmon  in 
enough  boiling  water  to  cover,  add 
1  teaspoon  salt  to  each  quart  of 
water;  boil  1  minute,  then  draw 
on  one  side,  and  simmer  slowly  until 
cooked,  allowing  10  minutes  to  the 
pound;  drain  thoroughly,  and  serve 
on  folded  napkin;  decorate  with 
parsley. 

Serve  with  parsley  sauce.  For 
sauce.  Blend  2  tablespoons  Crisco 
with  2  tablespoons  flour,  add  1  cup 
milk,  salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper  to 
taste,  stir  till  boiling,  then  boil  8 
minutes,  add  2  tablespoons  chopped 
parsley,  mix  well  and  use. 

March  18 

*Broiled  Spanish  Mackerel 

Grilled  Guinea  Chicken 

Candied  Sweet  Potatoes 

Baked  Eggplant 

Cold  Asparagus,  Vinaigrette 

Devilled  Cheese 

Macedoine  of  Fruits 

Coffee 

*Broiled  Spanish  Mackerel — Split  a 
good-sized  Spanish  mackerel  down 
the  back,  clean  and  wipe  as  dry  as 
possible,  leaving  the  head  and  tail 
on  or  off,  as  desired.  Sprinkle  well 
with  salt  and  pepper.  Rub  the  wire 
broiler  with  Crisco  and  lay  on  this, 
flesh  side  up.  Turn  when  the  flesh 
is  tender  and  broil  on  the  skin  side 
until  brown  and  crisp,  and  serve 
with  cucumbers  dressed  with  oil  and 
lemon  juice. 


167 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


March  19 

*Chickens  Stewed  with  Olives 
Chartreuse  of  Spinach 

Baked  Squash 
Asparagus  Salad 

Rhubarb  Tarts 
Cofee 
*Chickens  Stewed  with  Olives — Cut  2 
young  chickens  into  joints  and  put 
to  cook  in  3  pints  of  water  with  pep- 
per, salt  and  an  onion.  Cook  until 
the  chickens  are  very  tender.  Take 
up,  drain  and  wipe  chickens  and  fry 
them  in  Crisco  till  they  brown. 
Strain  water  in  which  chickens  were 
cooked  and  take  a  little  more  than 
}4  a  pint  of  it  for  sauce.  Put  this 
into  the  frying  pan  in  which  chickens 
were  fried,  thicken  it  a  little,  and 
into  it  put  2  dozens  olives,  chopped, 
and  1  tablespoon  capers.  When  it  is 
quite  hot  and  smooth  pour  over 
chickens  and  serve. 

March  20 

*  Princess  Soup 
Feat  Chops,  Horseradish  Sauce 
Fried  Carrots 
Baked  Asparagus  Tips 
Spinach  Salad 
Peach  Mousse 
Coffee 
*Princess   Soup — Chop    very    fine    1 
cup  sorrel,  and  cook  in  1  tablespoon 
Crisco.     Add   ^  teaspoon  sugar,  ^ 
teaspoon     tarragon     or    white    wine 
vinegar,    1    teaspoon    salt,    1    table- 
spoon flour,  and  when  boiling  add  1 
pint  hot  water.     Cook  for  }4  hour, 
then  add  1  quart  white  stock  and  a 
grating  of  nutmeg  and   dash   of  red 
pepper.     Bring  to  a  boil,  add  beaten 
yolkof  1  eggand  1  cupcream  and  serve. 

March  21 

Baked  Shad  Roe  with  Bacon 
*Broiled  Lamb  Chops,  Mint  Jelly  Sauce 
Cucumbers      Baked  Asparagus  Tips 
Shrimp  Salad 
Rice  Souffle 
Coffee 
*Broiled  Lamb  Chops — Trim  and  flat- 
ten chops,  sprinkle  each  with  sherry 
wine,  rub  with  salt  and  white  pepper 


and  broil  over  a  clear  fire  until  they 
are  done,  according  to  the  tastes  of 
those  who  are  to  eat  them.  Melt 
together  4  tablespoons  Crisco,  if 
there  are  8  chops,  a  small  tumbler 
mint  jelly,  add  to  it  chopped  parsley 
and  a  few  drops  of  lemon  juice  and 
pour  over  chops  just  as  they  are  to  be 
served. 

March  22 

Czarina  Soup 
"Guinea  lien.  Roasted 
Mashed  Potatoes       Creamed  Onions 
Dandelion  Salad 
Frozen  Pudding  Coffee 

*Guinea  Hen,  Roasted — Truss  2 
guinea  hens,  cover  breasts  with  thin 
slices  of  bacon,  and  put  in  roaster 
and  bake,  basting  often  until  tender. 
Remove  bacon  and  brown.  Melt  in 
roasting  pan  2  tablespoons  Crisco, 
stir  in  2  tablespoons  flour,  pour  in 
gradually  2  cups  scalded  cream,  and 
stir  constantly.  Strain,  season  with 
salt  and  white  pepper,  and,  if  liked, 
a  tiny  grain  nutmeg,  and  pour  this 
over  guinea  hens,  or  pass  separately 
Serve  with  these,  potato  balls  of  uni- 
form size,  which  have  been  sauted 
in  Crisco  and  sprinkled  with  chopped 
parsley. 

March  23 

Cream  of  Cauliflower  Soup 
Flounder  au  Gratin 
*Mutton  Cutlets,  a  la  Soubise 
Potatoes  Tossed  Tomatoes 

Combination  Salad 
Apple  Dumplings  Coffee 

*Mutton  Cutlets,  a  la  Soubise — 6  mut- 
ton cutlets,  yi  cup  dried  beans, 
brown  sauce,  2  onions,  3  tablespoons 
Crisco,  and  }4  cup  white  sauce. 
Trim  cutlets,  season  them  with 
pepper  and  salt,  and  fry  in  hot  Crisco. 
Soak  dried  beans  in  water  for 
several  hours,  then  boil  them  in  a 
stewpan  until  tender.  Drain,  and 
pass  them  through  a  sieve.  Melt 
Crisco  in  a  saucepan,  stir  in  sieved 
beans,  add  to  them  the  onions, 
previously  boiled  and  sieved,  season, 
and  stir  over  fire  until  hot.    Then  add 


168 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


white  sauce.  Dish  cutlets  in  a 
circle  on  a  hot  dish,  and  put  puree  of 
beans  and  onions  in  center.  Pour 
some  brown  sauce  round  and  serve. 

March  24 

Calf's  Tail  Soup 

*Braised  Fillet  of  Veal 

Braised  Belgian  Endive      Potato  Puree 

Beet  and  Cabbage  Salad 

Banana  Trifle 

Coffee 

*Braised  Fillet  of  Veal — 3j^   pounds 

veal,    yi    pound    larding    bacon,     1 

onion,   1   carrot,   1   turnip,  yi  lemon, 

forcemeat,  stock  and   a  little  celery. 

Remove  bone,  fill  in  cavity  with 
forcemeat.  Cut  some  even  strips 
of  bacon  ]^  of  an  inch  thick,  and  with 
a  larding  needle  thread  neatly  on  top 
of  meat.  Slice  vegetables,  place  them 
in  a  pan,  set  veal  on  these,  sprinkle 
with  a  little  lemon  juice.  Cover 
with  Criscoed  paper,  and  add  stock 
to  come  three-parts  up  the  meat. 
Cover  closely  and  set  pan  in  oven 
(in  order  to  get  top  heat  also)  or 
over  a  gentle  fire,  and  simmer  lyi 
to  3  hours.  Remove  veal  to  a  drip- 
ping tin  with  very  little  stock,  and 
brown  in  front  of  fire  or  in  hot  oven. 
Reduce  stock  in  pan,  meanwhile, 
by  fast  boiling  without  lid,  and 
strain  round  meat.  Garnish  with 
cut  lemon,  and,  if  liked,  with  curled 
bacon  and   forcemeat  balls. 

The  forcemeat  is  made  as  follows: 
A  ^cup  Crisco,  4  tablespoonschopped 
cooked  ham,  1  cup  breadcrumbs,  1 
tablespoon  chopped  parsley,  1  tea- 
spoon mixed  herbs,  thyme,  and  mar- 
joram. Add  salt  and  pepper  to  taste, 
and  mix  with  2  well-beaten  eggs. 

March  25 

Scallop  Chowder 

*Boiled  Cod,  Oyster  Sauce 

Mashed  Potatoes  Stewed  Corn 

Watercress,  French  Dressing 

Cheese  Biscuits         Ginger  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Boiled  Cod— yfzsh    the    fish    (about 

2  to  3  pounds  cod),  and  put  into  a 

fish-kettle,  containing  enough  boiling 


water  to  cover  it.  Add  some  salt, 
bring  quickly  to  boil;  then  draw  pan 
to  side  of  fire,  and  let  it  stay  in  hot 
water  until  cooked.  Do  not  let 
water  boil  or  simmer  again.  Cod 
cooked  in  this  way  has  a  much  finer 
flavor  than  if  it  is  allowed  to  simmer 
or  boil.  Take  up  fish  on  drainer, 
slide  it  on  to  a  hot  dish  on  a  folded 
napkin,  and  serve  garnished  with 
sprigs  of  crisp  parsley.  Send  to 
table  with  oyster  sauce,  which  is 
made  as  follows:  4  tablespoons 
Crisco,  6  tablespoons  flour,  1  small 
onion,  ^  carrot,  12  whole  peppers, 
^2  bay  leaf,  1  clove,  1  bouquet  garni, 
small  blade  mace,  salt,  and  ten 
oysters.  Peel  the  onion,  scrape  car- 
rot; put  them  into  saucepan  with 
bay  leaf,  whole  pepper,  bouquet 
garni,  and  clove;  add  milk,  and  bring 
to  boil.  When  milk  boils  take  out 
mace  and  bay  leaf.  Melt  Crisco  in 
small  saucepan;  mix  in  flour  smooth- 
ly; whisk  into  this  hot  milk.  Stir 
until  it  boils,  then  let  it  simmer 
from  10  to  15  minutes.  Take  out 
bouquet;  rub  sauce  through  a  sieve. 
Take  10  oysters  and  their  liquor  and 
put  into  a  saucepan  and  bring  to 
boiling  point.  Then  take  the  oysters 
and  cut  each  in  quarters.  Heat  the 
sauce  and  add  the  oyster  liquor, 
reduce  well,  strain  and  return  to 
saucepan;  stir  in  1  yolk  of  egg,  bind, 
and  then  add  oysters  and  lemon 
juice.  Stir  till  hot,  but  it  must  not 
boil.     Season  to  taste  and  serve. 

March  26 

Pepper  Cocktail 

*Fried  Pigeons 

Baked  Onions  Mashed  Potatoes 

Celery  and  Nut  Salad 

Cheese  Custards 

Orange  Ice  Cream 

Coffee 

*Fried  Pigeons — 4  pigeons,  yj  pound 
sausage  meat,  1  egg,  carrot,  turnip, 
onion,  celery,  mace,  and  cloves. 
Empty  and  split  pigeons  in  halves, 
lengthways;  remove  1  joint  of  wing 
and  of  leg,  and  truss  neatly  wash 
thoroughly. 

169 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Put  into  a  stewpan,  a  small  bit 
turnip  and  carrot,  small  onion,  bit 
of  celery,  blade  of  mace,  few  cloves 
and  whole  peppers;  place  pigeons  on 
top;  add  2  cups  water,  and  all  gib- 
lets of  pigeons  nicely  cleaned  and 
prepared;  cover  all  with  Criscoed 
paper  and  cover  them  with  lid,  and 
cook  gently  1  hour.  Remove  pigeons 
from  pan,  and  dry  each  thoroughly. 
Divide  sausage  into  4  portions;  fill 
hollow  of  pigeons  with  these,  and 
with  floured  hands  pat  it  quite 
smooth,  using  flour  all  over  pigeons. 
Have  an  egg  well  beaten;  cover 
carefully  with  it,  and  roll  in  fine 
breadcrumbs.  Put  into  hot  Crisco, 
and  fry  a  golden  brown.  Have  the 
following  sauce  in  dish,  and  place  the 
pigeons  neatly  in  center:  Strain 
liquor  pigeons  were  stewed  in,  and 
into  pan  put  1  tablespoon  flour  and 
1  tablespoon  Crisco,  moisten  it  with 
a  little  cold  water;  then  add  to  it 
the  liquor,  a  %  teaspoon  meat  ex- 
tract, 1  small  tomato  chopped  up, 
and  salt  to  taste;  let  all  boil  for  10 
minutes;  then  strain.  It  may  re- 
quire more  stock  or  water  to  be  added 
to  make  sauce  a  good  consistency. 


^  at  a  time,  stirring  until  well 
mixed,  then  beating  until  smooth 
and  glossy. 

March  28 

Anchovy  Eclairs 

*  Planked  Shad,  Butter  Sauce 

Cucumbers  Potato  Puff 

Asparagus  Salad 

Cheese  Sandwiches 

Cafe  Parfait 

Coffee 

*Planked  Shad — Clean  and  split 
down  the  back  a  good  3-pound  shad. 
Heat  plank  very  hot,  lay  fish  upon  it, 
skin  side  down,  or  that  portion  will 
be  raw.  The  hot  plank  cooks  it. 
Brush  flesh  carefully  over  with  olive 
oil,  then  sprinkle  with  salt  and  pep- 
per. Bake  for  30  minutes  in  a  hot 
oven.  Baste  frequently  with  melted 
Crisco.  It  may  be  cooked  in  a  gas 
range  having  the  flame  over  the  fish. 
When  cooked  pour  over  the  fish  2 
tablespoons  melted  Crisco  and  juice 
of  1  lemon.  Garnish  with  parsley 
and  quarters  of  lemon.  Set  the  plank 
on  a  serving  dish  and  serve  with 
butter  sauce. 


March  27 

Grape  Fruit  Cocktail 

Roast  Duck,  Currant  Jelly 

*Cr earned  Turnips 

Sweet  Potato  Croquettes 

Apple  Salad 

Cheese  Straws 

Marmalade  Ice  Cream 

Coffee 

*Creamed  Turnips — Wash  turnips, 
and  cut  in  l4  inch  cubes.  Cook  3 
cups  in  boiling  salted  water  20  min- 
utes, or  until  soft.  Drain,  and  serve 
with  the  following  sauce:  2  table- 
spoons Crisco,  2  tablespoons  flour, 
1  cup  milk,  ^  teaspoon  salt,  and 
pepper  to  taste.  Put  Crisco  in  sauce- 
pan, stir  until  melted  and  bubbling; 
add  flour  mixed  with  seasonings,  and 
stir  until  thoroughly  blended.  Pour 
on  gradually  the  milk,  adding  about 


March  29 

Printanier  Soup 

Broiled  Chicken,  Oyster  Sauce 

*  Princess  Potatoes 

String  Beans 

Watercress,  French  Dressing 

Cheese  Biscuits 

Lemon  Meringue  Pie 

Coffee 

*  Princess  Potatoes — Wash,  peel  and 
boil  two  pounds  potatoes,  drain  off 
water  and  dry  in  oven,  then  rub 
through  sieve,  add  3  egg  yolks,  2 
tablespoons  Crisco,  1  tablespoon 
cream,  seasoning  salt,  pepper  and 
grated  nutmeg.  When  well  mixed  lay 
on  floured  board  and  divide  into  12 
pieces,  shape  each  piece  into  a  square, 
put  them  on  a  buttered  tin,  brush 
over  with  beaten  egg  and  bake  in  hot 
oven  till  well  browned. 


170 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


March  30 

Cream  of  Barley.  Soup 

*English  Chicken  Pie 

Broiled  Tomatoes 

Cucumber  Salad  with  Red  Peppers 

Biscuits  Cheese 

Coffee 

*English  Chicken  Pie — 1  chicken,  yi 
pound  veal  fillet,  4  ounces  bacon, 
3  hard-cooked  eggs,  y^  pound  mush- 
rooms, 2  tablespoons  Crisco,  pepper 
and  salt  to  taste,  chopped  parsley, 
puff-pastry,  stock,  and  1  egg. 

Cut  fowl  into  small  joints,  season 
these  with  salt  and  pepper.  Slice 
veal  thinly,  line  bottom  of  fireproof 
dish  with  this,  place  on  top  a  layer  of 
chicken.  Chop  mushrooms  finely, 
saute  them  in  Crisco  in  small  stew- 
pan;  sprinkle  half  of  this  over  pieces 
of  chicken,  then  layer  of  hard-cooked 
eggs,  over  that  thin  slices  bacon 
and  chopped  parsley.  Continue  in 
this  way  until  all  ingredients  are  used 
up  and  the  fireproof  dish  is  full; 
fill  dish  three  parts  full  with  stock. 
Put  a  strip  of  pastry  round  the  edge 
of  dish,  wet  this  lightly  with  water, 
cover  the  pie  with  puff-pastry  rolled 
out  to  the  proper  size  and  thickness; 
press  down  the  paste  on  to  the  wet 
edge  of  paste,  trim  round.  Decorate 
the  paste  at  the  edge  according  to 
taste;  brush  over  pie  with  beaten 
egg,  make  a  slit  in  the  center  of  the 
lid,  and  place  a  circle  of  pastry  leaves 
round  it.  Put  pie  in  moderate  oven, 
and  bake  about  1^  hours.  Pour  in 
a  little  stock  before  serving. 

March  31 

Deviled  Clams 

*Broiled  Lobsters,  Melted  Butter 

Potatoes  au  Natural    Baked  Macaroni 

Romaine  Salad,  French  Dressing 

Snow  Pudding,  Chocolate  Sauce 

Coffee 

*Br oiled  boosters — Kill  lobsters  by 
cutting  tails  off  with  one  stroke  of 
the  knife,  just  where  they  join  the 
body.       With     another     clean     cut 


divide  each  lengthwise  into  2  equal 
parts,  shell  and  all.  Take  out  coral, 
the  one  long  intestine  and  stomach. 
Crack  claws  with  a  hammer.  Put 
within  a  Criscoed  broiler,  split  side 
downward,  and  broil  over  fire.  As 
soon  as  juice  begins  to  run  freely 
withdraw  long  enough  to  baste 
liberally  with  melted  Crisco,  and 
return  to  fire,  turning  often  to  keep 
in  juices.  Cook  about  10  minutes  on 
split  or  flesh  side,  and  8  upon  other. 
Have  ready  sauce  made  by  rubbing  2 
tablespoons  Crisco  to  cream  with 
lemon  juice  and  finely-minced  parsley, 
adding  little  red  pepper,  and  baste 
lobsters  with  this  while  hissing  hot. 
Serve  half  lobster  to  each  guest. 

April  1 

*Fried  Oysters,  Tartare  Sauce 

Roast  Guinea  Hens 

Rice  Croquettes  en  Surprise 

Lettuce,   Asparagus   and   Red   Pepper 

Salad 

Cheese  Wafers 

Pineapple  Mousse 

Coffee 

*Fried  Oysters — Wash,  drain,  and  dry 
oysters  between  2  towels;  let  stand 
in  a  marinade  10  or  more  minutes, 
then  drain  again.  Roll  in  cracker- 
crumbs,  seasoned  with  salt,  pepper, 
and  paprika.  For  2  cups  oysters, 
beat  2  eggs  with  2  tablespoons  cold 
water  until  well  mixed;  dip  oysters, 
crumbed,  into  egg,  and  roll  again 
in  crumbs. 

Fry  1  minute  in  hot  Crisco.  Use 
frying-basket  and  cook  6  oysters  at  a 
time.  Drain  and  serve  at  once  with 
tartare  sauce. 

The  marinade  is  made  as  follows: 
Take  1  part  melted  Crisco  and  3  of 
vinegar,  with  salt  and  pepper  to  taste. 
Stir  oysters  into  this  and  let  stand  10 
minutes,  then  drain  off  any  of  the 
marinade  that  has  not  been  absorbed. 


171 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


April  2 

Emergency  Soup 

*Veal  Pot  Pie  Baked  Dumplings 

Cabbage  Salad 

Cheese         Crackers 

Fruit  Jelly,  Whipped  Cream 

Cofee 

*Feal  Pot  Pie — Wipe  piece  of  veal 
from  shoulder;  and  cut  into  pieces 
for  serving;  add  yi  inch  strip  salt 
pork  or  bacon  for  each  piece  of  veal, 
cover  with  cold  water,  put  over  fire 
and  bring  quickly  to  boiling  point, 
then,  after  boiling  five  minutes,  skim 
and  let  simmer  until  meat  is  tender. 
When  nearly  tender,  add  salt  and 
pepper  to  taste,  and  biscuit  mixture 
cut  into  rounds.  Cook  ten  minutes 
without  lifting  cover.  Serve  meat  in 
center  of  platter,  dumplings  at  ends 
and  sauce,  thickened,  if  needed,  with 
flour  and  water,  over  whole.  Dump- 
lings may  be  steamed  IS  minutes  over 
saucepan  boiling  water.  This  is 
usually  preferable,  to  avoid  removing 
them  from  fire  until  instant  of  serv- 
ing. Beaten  yolks  of  2  eggs,  diluted 
with  ^  cup  cream  and  added  to 
sauce,  gives  a  richer  dish. 

Biscuit  mixture  is  made  as  follows: 
Sift  1  quart  good  flour,  2  teaspoons 
baking  powder  and  1  teaspoon  salt, 
putting  it  through  sifter  2  or  3  times. 
Rub  into  flour  1  large  tablespoon 
Crisco  and  add  sufficient  sweet  milk 
to  make  dough  as  soft  as  can  be 
rolled  and  cut.  Roll  about  ^  inch 
thick,  cut  with  round  biscuit  cutter. 

April  3 

Crecy  Soup 

Mutton  Cutlets         Savory  Lentils 

Roast  Pigeons         Chipped  Potatoes 

Egg  and  Lettuce  Mayonnaise 

*  Apricot  Fritters,  Vanilla  Sauce 

Coffee 

*Apricot  Fritters — 6  apricots,  yi  pint 
syrup,  half  lemon,  frying-batter, 
Crisco,  and  vanilla  sauce. 

Select  firm,  ripe  apricots,  or  pre- 
served ones  can  be  used,  cut  them 
in  halves,  and  take  out  stones.    Stew 


them  gently  in  syrup  with  grated 
rind  of  J/^  lemon.  When  they  are 
tender,  drain  well,  and  let  them  cool. 
Have  ready  some  frying-batter,  dip 
apricots  into  it,  then  fry  in  plenty  of 
hot  Crisco.  When  a  nice  golden 
color,  take  them  up,  drain  on  paper, 
dish  up  on  a  napkin  and  serve  with 
vanilla  sauce. 

April  4 

Brown  Soup 

Mousse  of  Ham 

Veal  Olives 

Mashed  Potatoes  Spinach 

Pear  Salad 

Cheese  Ramekins 

*Rice  Souffle       Fruit  Custards 

Coffee 

*Rice  Souffle — 4  tablespoons  ground 

rice  stirred  to  smooth  paste  with  }4 

tablespoon  Crisco  and  6  tablespoons 

milk.     Add   remainder   of  a   pint  of 

milk,  and  put  all  into  a  saucepan,  and 

stir  till  it  thickens.    Add  beaten  yolks 

4  eggs  and  2  tablespoons  sugar  well 

stirred,    also    add    the    well    whisked 

whites  of  4  eggs.    Mix  all  thoroughly, 

place  in  a  Criscoed  souflfle  dish,  and 

bake  for  yi  hour.     Serve  instantly. 

Aprils 

*  White  Soup 
Fried  Fillets  of  Haddock 
Roast  Chicken,  Bread  Sauce 
Potato  Chips  Brussels  Sprouts 

Cress  and  Orange  Salad 
Iced  Castle  Puddings 
Coffee 
*White     Soup — 2     small     onions,     1 
turnip,    1    pound    potatoes,    1    stalk 
celery,  2  small  parsnips  or  artichokes, 
3  pints  water,  l4  pint  milk,  1  table- 
spoon   flour   or   cornstarch,   2   table- 
spoons  Crisco,   and   salt   to   taste. 

Cut  about  2  pounds  of  any  white 
vegetables,  previously  washed  and 
peeled,  into  pieces,  or  preferably 
several  kinds  mixed,  and  boil  them 
until  soft  in  the  water  with  salt  and 
Crisco.  Rub  them  through  sieve  or 
colander,  put  them  back  in  the  stew 
pan  with  milk,  and  let  boil.     Put  in 


172 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


flour,  mixed  smoothly  with  little 
cold  water  or  milk,  let  soup  boil  for 
10  minutes,  and  then  serve. 

April  6 

Broiled  Soft  Shell  Crabs 

*Sweetbreads  with  Mushroom  Puree 

Boiled  Bermuda  Onions 

New  Green  Peas 

Lettuce  and  Radish  Salad 

Fried  Cornstarch  Pudding 

Cofee 

*Sweetbreads  with  Mushroom  Puree — 
Blanch  and  prepare  sweetbreads,  by 
cutting  away  all  the  windpipes  and 
fibrous  nerves.  When  they  are  quite 
cool,  put  under  a  weight  to  flatten 
well.  Dip  them  in  melted  Crisco 
and  broil,  without  browning  too  much, 
over  a  clear  fire. 

Put  sweetbreads  on  very  thin  slices 
of  round  toast  and  serve  with  this 
puree  poured  over  all:  Chop  1  dozen 
fresh  mushrooms  and  put  them  to 
cook  with  ^2  pint  of  cream  and 
}4  cup  fine  breadcrumbs.  Cook 
them  in  double  boiler  till  mushrooms 
can  be  pressed  through  rather  fine 
sieve.  Return  this  puree  to  fire, 
season  with  salt  and  white  pepper, 
and  let  get  as  hot  as  possible  before 
using  it  for  sweetbreads. 

April  7 

Grilled  Brook  Trout 

*Spring  Lamb  Steak,  a  la  Minute 

Lentil  Croquettes 

Potato  Rissoles 

Grapefruit  Salad 

Cheese 

Crackers 

Golden  Parfait 

Cofee 

*Spring  Lamb  Steak,  a  la  Minute — Rub 
some  fillets  of  spring  lamb  steak  with 
salt  and  pepper,  and  fry  them  gently 
in  3  tablespoons  Crisco  which  has 
been  melted  in  an  iron  frying  pan, 
until  thoroughly  cooked.  Remove 
from  frying  pan  and  keep  hot.  Put 
12  large  fresh  mushroom  caps  in  pan 
and    cook    until    tender,    adding    ^ 


cup  cream  and  salt  and  pepper  to 
taste.  Put  lamb  steak  on  hot  platter, 
garnish  with  mushroom  caps,  and 
pour  sauce  around. 

Aprils 

*Red  Pottage 

Boudins  of  Ham  with  Peas 

Roast  Ribs  of  Beef    Yorkshire  Pudding 

Potatoes 

Cauliflower 

Chiffonade  Salad 

Rhubarb  Tart  and  Custard 

Cofee 

*Red  Pottage — ^  a  pound  dried 
beans,  1  teacup  tomato  puree,  1 
beet,  2  tablespoons  Crisco,  2  onions, 
piece  of  celery,  1  small  piece  of 
parsnip,  2  quarts  good  stock.  Put 
Crisco  in  saucepan  then  add  onions, 
celery  and  parsnip;  cook  a  little,  do 
not  let  it  get  very  brown,  then  add 
dried  beans,  tomato  puree;  sliced  beet 
and  add  pepper  and  salt  to  taste  and 
then  stock,  and  boil  till  all  is  tender. 
Rub  through  a  fine  sieve,  reheat  and 
serve. 

April  9 

*Corn  Chowder 

Broiled  Steak 

Baked  Potatoes 

Horseradish,  Cream  Dressing 

Scalloped  Tomatoes 

Celery  Salad 

Cherry  Sponge 

Cofee 

*Corn  Chowder — 1  can  corn,  1  cup 
salt  pork  cut  in  cubes,  1  cup  potatoes, 
^  cup  chopped  onions,  salt  and  red 
pepper  to  taste,  3  cups  water,  2  cups 
milk,  1  tablespoon  Crisco,  1  tablespoon 
flour,  and  ^  cup  crackercrumbs. 
Cook  salt  pork  in  frying  pan  for  5 
minutes;  add  onion  and  cook  until  a 
yellow  color.  Parboil  potatoes  5 
minutes;  add  to  onion  with  corn  and 
water;  cook  20  minutes.  Thicken  milk 
with  Crisco  and  flour  cooked  together. 
Combine  mixtures;  add  cracker- 
crumbs  and  salt  and  pepper  to  taste, 
then  serve. 


173 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


April  10 

Puree  of  Black  Beans 

Baked  Macaroni  *  Potato  Puff 

Cabbage  Salad 

Cheese  Puffs 

Spice  Jelly,   Whipped  Cream 

Coffee 

*Potato  Puff — Prepare  2}4  cups  hot 
mashed  potato.  Add  ^  cup  milk,  2 
well-beaten  yolks  of  eggs,  3  table- 
spoons Crisco,  and  salt  and  pepper 
to  taste.  Beat  this  well,  then  add 
beaten  whites  of  2  eggs.  Pile  lightly 
in  Criscoed  baking  dish  and  bake  until 
puffed  and  brown. 


April  11 

Bean  Soup 

Globe  Artichoke  with  Sauce  Hollandaise 

Stuffed  Peppers         Potato  Straws 

*Grilled  Tomatoes 

Pimiento  Salad 

Fruit  Assorted  Cakes 

Coffee 

*Grilled  Tomatoes — Wipe  tomatoes, 
spread  little  Crisco  on  each  with  a 
knife,  and  set  on  grill  pan  near 
to  clear  fire.  Turn  often,  basting 
or  keeping  moist  with  Crisco.  Whole 
tomatoes  cook  in  7  to  10  minutes, 
according  to  size.  Sliced  ones  in 
about  5  minutes.  When  meat  or 
ham  is  being  grilled  tomatoes  will 
cook  in  pan  underneath  the  grid  on 
which  meat  rests. 


April  12 

*  Hollandaise  Soup 
Escalloped  Potatoes     Vegetable  Pie 
Celery  Patties 

Romaine  Salad 
Chocolate  Tapioca 
Coffee 

*  Hollandaise  Soup — 1  quart  vege- 
table stock,  4  tablespoons  Crisco,  4 
tablespoons  flour,  4  yolks  eggs,  yi 
pint  cream,  }4  cup  green  peas, 
cooked,  1  teaspoon  salt,  }4  cup  car- 
rot,  cut   in   small    pieces,   cooked,    1 


teaspoon  sugar,  }^  cup  cut  cucumber, 
cooked,  and  1  teaspoon  chopped 
tarragon. 

Trim  peas,  carrots  and  cucumbers 
with  round  cutter,  size  and  shape  of 
peas.  Cook  them  in  boiling  water, 
being  careful  not  to  cook  them  too 
much.  Melt  Crisco  and  flour  in 
stewpan;  add  stock  and  let  boil  well. 
Break  yolks  of  eggs  into  a  basin  and 
add  cream,  then  add  the  liaison  of 
eggs  and  cream  to  stock;  let  it  just 
come  to  boil,  being  careful  it  does 
not  curdle.  Strain  into  a  clean  stew- 
pan,  add  vegetables  which  have  been 
previously  cooked,  and  tarragon 
and  serve. 


April  13 

Indian  Soup  Rice 

*Mock  Goose,  Apple  Sauce 

Stewed  Celery 

Pineapple  Salad 

Rhubarb  Pie 

Coffee 

*Mock  Goose — 2  cups  breadcrumbs,  2 
cups  dropped  black  walnuts,  2  cups 
boiled  rice,  6  hard-cooked  eggs,  3  raw 
eggs,  1  tablespoon  grated  onion,  salt, 
pepper  and  grated  nutmeg  to  taste. 
Put  breadcrumbs  in  saucepan  with 
2  cups  water;  cook  for  a  few  minutes; 
add  hard-cooked  eggs,  chopped; 
take  saucepan  from  fire  and  add 
black  walnut  meats  and  the  rice. 
When  this  is  well  mixed,  add  raw 
eggs,  slightly  beaten,  and  seasonings. 
Form  this  into  shape  of  a  goose, 
reserving  portions  for  legs  and  wings. 
Take  a  tablespoon  of  mixture  in  your 
hand  and  press  it  into  shape  of  a 
leg;  put  piece  of  dry  macaroni  into 
it  for  bone  and  fasten  it  to  goose. 
Do  other  side  same  way.  Form 
remaining  portions  into  small  pieces 
looking  like  wings  tucked  under; 
press  them  to  side  of  goose.  Brush 
goose  over  with  melted  Crisco  and 
bake  for  1  hour.  Serve  with  apple 
sauce. 


174 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


April  14 

*Lobster  Newburgh 

Glazed  Sweetbreads 
Loin  of  Lamb,  Roasted,  Mint  Sauce 
Asparagus      Potato  Croquettes 
Pineapple  Sherbet      Coffee 
*Lobster  Newburgh — 2  pounds  lobster, 
yi  cup  Crisco,  salt,  red  pepper,  and 
grated  nutmeg  to  taste,  1  tablespoon 
sherry,  1  tablespoon  brandy,  J/j   cup 
cream,    and    2    egg   yolks.      Remove 
cooked  lobster  meat  from  shell  and 
cut  in  sHces.     Melt  Crisco,  add  lob- 
ster and  cook  3  minutes.     Add  salt, 
red    pepper,    grated    nutmeg,    sherry 
and  brandy;  cook  1  minute,  then  add 
cream  and  yolks  of  eggs  slightly  beat- 
en, and  stir  until  thickened.     Serve 
with  toast. 

April  15 

*Stewed  Chicken 

Baking  Powder  Biscuit 

Spinach  Buttered  Parsnips 

Celery  and  Orange  Salad 

Cheese  Relish       Ribbon  Jelly 

Coffee 

*Stewed  Chicken — Draw,    singe,    and 

joint     a     stewing     chicken.       Season 

pieces  with  pepper  and  salt  and  cover 

with  boiling  water.     Cover  and  stew 

gently  until  tender. 

Remove  chicken.  Place  pieces  in  a 
colander  on  a  plate  in  oven  to  drain, 
and  thicken  gravy  by  adding  1 
tablespoon  flour  rubbed  with  1 
tablespoon  Crisco.  Add  salt  and 
pepper  to  taste,  a  little  chopped 
parsley  and  1  cup  milk.  Beat  an 
egg  until  light;  pour  on  it  part  of 
gravy,  beating  carefully  to  prevent 
lumps;  return  to  remainder  of  gravy; 
bring  to  boil  and  pour  over  chicken. 

April  16 

Oyster  Bisque 

*Mackerel,  a  la  Claudine  Radishes 

Corn       Peas       Potatoes 

Lettuce  and  Pepper  Grass  Salad 

Cheese  Balls        Princess  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Mackerel,  a  la  Claudine — Take  a  nice 

large   fresh    mackerel,   split   it   down 

back   and   remove   bone,   season   fish 

with    melted    Crisco,    chopped    fresh 


mushrooms,  salt,  pepper,  and  finely 
chopped  shallot;  put  on  to  a  grill  iron 
and  cook  in  front  or  over  brisk  fire  for 
about  15  minutes,  then  take  up  and 
serve  on  hot  dish  with  the  following 
sauce:  Take  I  cup  brown  sauce,  2 
tablespoons  capers,  pinch  chopped 
parsley,  four  anchovies  rubbed 
through  sieve,  1  teaspoon  glaze,  and 
I  chopped  shallot,  3  or  4  shredded 
button  mushrooms;  boil  up  and  sim- 
mer for  10  minutes,  rub  through 
sieve,  then  add  juice  of  1  lemon  and  4 
chopped  olives,  reboil  and  serve. 

April  17 

*  Potato  Soup 

Breaded  Lamb  Chops,  Tomato  Sauce 

Mashed  Potatoes 

Creamed  Turnips     Cheese  Salad 

Canary  Pudding        Coffee 

*Potato  Soup — 1  quart  white  second 

stock  or  water,  }^  pint  milk,  1  pound 

potatoes,    1    onion,    1    stalk  celery,   2 

tablespoons     Crisco,      1     tablespoon 

fine    sago    or    crushed    tapioca,    salt 

and  pepper  to  taste. 

Slice  potatoes,  onion,  and  celery. 
Make  Crisco  hot  in  stewpan,  add 
vegetables,  fry  and  cook  until  Crisco 
is  absorbed,  stirring  frequently  to  pre- 
vent them  browning.  Add  stock,  and 
simmer  until  vegetables  are  tender 
(about  1  hour).  Rub  through  fine 
sieve;  return  to  saucepan,  add  milk, 
and  bring  to  boil.  Sprinkle  in  sago, 
cook  until  transparent,  add  seasoning 
to  taste,  and  serve. 

April  18 

Orange  Cocktail 

Boiled  Capon,  Caper  Sauce 

Buttered  Beans         *Carrot  Fritters 

Olive  Salad      Baked  Chocolate  Custard 

Coffee 
*Carrot  Fritters — Have  nice,  young, 
tender  carrots,  clean  and  scrape 
them  carefully,  and  cut  each  one  in 
two  lengthwise.  Put  to  boil  in  salted 
water.  Take  up,  drain  and  cool, 
and  make  a  frying  batter  as  follows: 
Beat  up  1  egg,  sift  in  1  cup  flour,  ^ 
cup  milk,  pinch  of  salt,  and  1  table- 
spoon melted  Crisco.  Mix  till  smooth 
and  glossy.     Allow  to  stand  in  cool 


175 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners' 


place  for  1  hour,  then  add  1  tea- 
spoon baking  powder.  Put  in  few 
pieces  of  carrot  at  a  time.  Drop 
into  hot  Crisco  and  fry  for  few  min- 
utes.    Serve  hot. 

April  19 

*  Kidney  Soup 

Flounder,   White  Sauce 

Roast  Shoulder  of  Mutton 

Potatoes  Spinach  au  Jus 

Cauliflower  and  Red  Pepper  Salad 

Moulded  Pears,  Whipped  Cream 

Coffee 

*  Kidney  Soup—yi  pound  ox  kidney.J^ 

pound  lean  beef,  3  pints  brown  stock, 

3    tablespoons   coarsely   chopped   fat 

bacon,   1   tablespoon  chopped   onion, 

2    tablespoons    flour,    2    tablespoons 

Crisco,  salt   and   pepper  to  taste. 

Wash  kidney  and  beef  quickly, 
dry  them,  and  cut  them  up  quite 
small.  Melt  Crisco  in  saucepan,  add 
bacon,  onion,  and  kidney,  and  fry 
them  until  brown.  Add  stock  and 
salt  to  taste,  and  simmer  soup  for 
about  lyi  hours.  Strain  out  solid 
parts,  pound  them  to  a  paste,  and 
rub  this  through  fine  wire  or  hair 
sieve.  Rinse  out  pan,  mix  flour 
smoothly  and  thinly  with  little  of 
strained  soup.  Reboil  rest  of  liquid, 
pour  in  flour,  and  stir  it  till  it  boils. 
Cook  for  ten  minutes  and  carefully 
skim  it.  Then  mix  in  smoothly 
sieved  meat,  add  seasoning,  reheat 
soup  without  boiling  it  after  adding 
meat,  and  it  is  ready  to  serve. 
Water  can  replace  stock;  if  so,  add 
piece  of  carrot  and  turnip  and  bunch 
herbs  to  soup,  but  do  not  pound  or 
sieve  these.  A  more  delicate  soup  is 
made  with  four  or  five  sheep's  kid- 
neys instead  of  ox  kidney.  Add 
little    caramel    coloring   if  needed. 

April  20 

Celery  Soup 

*Braised  Ox-Tongue 

Baked  Potatoes        Masked  Turnips 

Cold  Slazv       Cheese       Wafers 

Rice  Mousse         Coffee 

*Braised  Ox-Tongue — 1   ox-tongue,   1 

Eint  stock,  1  onion,  1  small  carrot,  1 
ouquet  garni,  1  clove,  14  pint  piqu- 


ante  sauce,  and  6  thin  slices  bacon. 
Trim  ox-tongue,  which  should  be 
obtained  salted  or  pickled  ready  for 
use.  Blanch,  and  let  it  cool.  Put 
into  fish-kettle  or  stewpan,  large 
enough  to  hold  tongue,  slices  bacon, 
onion  peeled  and  sliced,  carrot  scraped 
and  cut  in  pieces,  bouquet  garni  and 
clove;  add  stock,  put  in  tongue,  and 
cook  until  three  parts  done,  then 
take  it  up,  and  skin  while  hot. 
Strain  liquor  it  was  cooked  in,  take 
off  fat,  add  piquante  sauce,  put 
tongue  into  this,  and  finish  cooking. 
When  tender,  cut  in  slices,  di^,  and 
pour  sauce  over,  and  serve.  Mashed 
potatoes,  spinach,  or  peas  served  with 
tongue  is  a  great  improvement. 

The  piquante  sauce  is  made  as  fol- 
lows: 4  shallots,  3  mushrooms,  1  bay 
leaf,  }4  carrot,  sprig  thyme,  2  table- 
spoons Crisco,  4  tablespoons  vinegar, 
half  pint  brown  stock,  yi  teaspoon 
anchovy  extract,  1  tablespoon  Wor- 
cestershire sauce,  3  tablespoons  flour, 
salt  and  red  pepper  to  taste. 

Peel  and  chop  shallots,  carrot,  and 
mushrooms;  melt  Crisco  in  a  sauce- 
pan; fry  vegetables  a  nice  brown; 
then  add  vinegar,  bay  leaf,  and 
thyme.  Reduce  vinegar  to  half  the 
quantity;  stir  in  flour,  dilute  with 
stock,  bring  to  boil;  then  add  anchovy 
extract,  Worcestershire  sauce,  salt 
and  red  pepper  to  taste.  Take  out 
thyme  and  bay  leaf.  Simmer  for  10 
minutes.     Skim,  and  use  as  required. 

April  21 

*Mock  Turtle  Soup 

Beef,  a  la  Mode  Potatoes 

Cauliflower  Beet  Salad 

Cheese  Wafers       Rhubarb  Shortcake 

Coffee 
*Mock  Turtle  Soup — J/j  calf's  head,  2 
pounds  shin  beef,  small  knuckle  veal, 
3  tablespoons  Crisco,  3^  cup  flour,  I 
ounce  ham,  large  bunch  herbs,  12 
whole  peppers,  6  cloves,  blade  mace, 
3  onions,  1  carrot,  }4  head  celery,  1 
leek,  glass  sherry  or  some  lemon 
juice,  salt  and  red  pepper  to  taste,  and 
quenelles.  Leave  head  in  water  to 
soak  for  5  or  6  hours;  then  wash  well 


176 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


and  take  out  brains.  Bone  head. 
Cut  6  ounces  lean  part  of  veal  and 
reserve  to  make  quenelles.  Then 
chop  bones  taken  from  head,  the 
veal,  and  beef.  Put  them  into  stock- 
pot,  and  place  flesh  from  head  on 
top;  then  well  cover  with  water,  add 
little  salt  and  let  slowly  come  to  boil. 
Skim  well;  add  vegetables,  cleaned 
but  not  cut  up,  and  spices.  Let  all 
simmer  very  slowly  for  8  or  9  hours. 
When  head  is  quite  tender  (it  will 
take  about  four  hours),  lift  it  out 
carefully  and  place  between  2  dishes 
to  press  until  quite  cold.  Strain 
stock.  Melt  Crisco  in  pan,  add  ham 
cut  into  small  pieces,  and  fry  slowly 
for  five  minutes,  then  add  flour  and 
stir  until  it  is  of  dark  brown  color. 
Take  dlF  stove  and  add  stock  by 
degrees;  stir  over  fire  until  it  boils; 
put  it  at  corner  of  stove  to  simmer 
for  20  minutes;  skim  and  strain  it. 
Cut  head  into  small  square  pieces  and 
warm  up  in  soup;  add  sherry,  red 
pepper,  and  salt  to  taste.  Turn  it  out 
into  tureen,  then  put  in  some  very 
small  quenelles,  made  with  teaspoons, 
and  poached  for  10  minutes  in  water. 

Vegetarian 

AprU  22 

Calcutta  Bisque 

Tomatoes  Casino 

*  Asparagus  Loaf,  Bechamel  Sauce 

Leeks  in  Butter  Roast  Potatoes 

Cherry  Salad 

Cheese         Crackers  Cofee 

*  Asparagus  Loaf — Crisco  thoroughly 
a  charlotte  russe  mold,  ^  size,  and 
line  it  with  cooked  tips  of  asparagus 
well  drained.  Cook  together  2 
tablespoons  flour  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  1  teaspoon  salt,  dash  of  pep- 
per, add  gradually  1  cup  of  cream  and 
boil  5  minutes.  Remove  from  fire, 
add  1  cup  cooked  asparagus  tips  and 
4  eggs  thoroughly  beaten.  Turn 
mixture  into  mold,  set  in  pan  of 
hot  water  and  cook  in  a  moderate 
oven  about  30  minutes  or  until 
center  is  firm.  Turn  loaf  on  hot  dish, 
arrange  about  it,  little  oblong  pieces 
of  bread    that  have  been  dipped    in 


beaten  eggs  and  milk  and  browned. 
Pour  sauce  around  it  and  serve  at 
once. 

Vegetarian 
April  23 

Julienne  Soup 

Creamed  Salsify  Patties 

Mushrooms  in  Casserole  ^ 

Mashed  Potatoes      Green  String  Beans 

Orange  Fritters       *Swiss  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Su>iss  Pudding — 1^  cups  bread- 
crumbs, 1  pound  apples,  4  table- 
spoons brown  sugar,  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  and  grated  lemon  rind. 
Choose  good  cooking  apples,  peel, 
core,  and  thinly  slice  them.  Well 
Crisco  a  pint  pudding-dish,  place  some 
crumbs  on  bottom,  and  press  some 
against  the  sides  of  dish,  put  in 
layer  of  apples,  some  sugar,  a  little 
lemon  peel  or  any  other  flavoring 
preferred,  then  a  few  more  crumbs, 
and  repeat  this  until  all  are  used; 
leaving  crumbs  for  top  layer. 

Pile  mixture  up  little  as  it  shrinks 
while  cooking.  Place  Crisco  in  small 
pieces  on  top.  Bake  in  moderately 
hot  oven  until  apples  are  quite 
cooked  and  pudding  is  browned  top 
and  bottom.  Turn  pudding  out  on 
to  flat  dish,  sprinkle  sugar  over  top. 
Serve  with  boiled  custard  or  cream. 
This  pudding  may  be  served  hot  or 
cold. 

Vegetarian 
April  24 

Cream  of  Pea  Soup 

Ladies'  Cabbage  in  Ramekins 

Chestnut  Puree 

Mock  New  Potatoes       *Creamed  Beets 

Banana  Salad 

Marshmallow  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Creamed  Beets — Boil  8  medium-sized 
beets  until  tender,  then  remove  from 
saucepan  and  place  them  in  cold 
water,  rub  skins  off  carefully  with 
hands,  cut  in  ^  inch  cubes.  Make  a 
sauce  of  2  tablespoons  Crisco  creamed 
with  2  tablespoons  flour  and  ^  cup 
water  in  which   beets  were  boiled  2 


177 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


tablespoons  cream,  2  tablespoons 
vinegar,  2  teaspoons  sugar,  salt  and 
pepper  to  taste.  Pour  sauce  over 
hot  beets  and  serve  in  hot  dish. 

Vegetarian 
April  25 

Cream  of  Turnip  Soup 
*Bean  Croquettes,  Tomato  Sauce 
Savory  Rice 
Lettuce  Salad,  French  Dressing 
Stewed  Prunes       Co  fee 
*Bean  Croquettes — 1  pint  white  beans, 
}4  cup  cream,  yolk  2  eggs,   1   table- 
spoon   Crisco,    1    tablespoon    flour,    1 
tablespoon    chopped    parsley,    1    tea- 
spoon  onion   juice,    1    teaspoon   salt, 
and    pepper    to    taste.      Soak    beans 
over  night,   drain,   cover  them   with 
fresh    water,    boil    an    hour,    drain, 
throw  away  water,  cover  with  fresh 
water    and    boil    until    tender;    drain 
and    press    beans    through    colander. 
Rub  Crisco  and   flour  together,   add 
cream,  stir  until  almost  boiling,  then 
add  yolks  of  eggs.     Stir  again  for  a 
minute  over  fire,  add  bean  pulp  and 
all  seasonings;   mix  and  turn  out  to 
cool.   When  cool,  form  into  cylinders, 
dip  in  egg,  roll  in  breadcrumbs  and  fry 
in  hot  Crisco.  Serve  with  tomatosauce. 

April  26 

Mushroom  Canapes 
*Chicken,  a  la  King 

Potato  Croquettes 
Tomato  Mayonnaise 
Cheese  Drops         Washington  Pie 
Coffee 
*Chicken,  a  la  King — ^  boiled  chicken 
(one   pint   in   thick   pieces),   2   table- 
spoons   Crisco,    2    fresh    mushrooms, 
1    cup   cream,    ^    cup   sherry   wine, 
yolks  2  eggs,  1  teaspoon  salt,  1  green 
pepper  and  1  red  pepper,  cut  in  long 
thin  strips.     Melt  Crisco,  add  mush- 
rooms, cook  S  minutes.    Add  chicken, 
heat  through,  add  salt,  wine  and  the 
strips  of  peppers.  (The  chicken  should 
be  removed  from  bone  in  long  thick 
pieces.)    Beat   yolks  until  light,   add 
cream,  cook  over  boiling  water  or  in 
chafing      dish,      stirring      constantly 
until  thickened,   about   l}4  minutes; 


then  pour  over  hot  chicken  mixture 
and  serve  at  once  on  toast. 

April  27 

Fried  Trout  Radishes 

^Grilled  Chickens 

Glazed  New  Potatoes  Broiled  Tomatoes 

Stuffed  Cucumber  Salad 

Cheese  Sticks 

Roman  Cream 

Coffee 

^Grilled  Chickens — Have  small  spring 

chickens,   clean    and   wipe  well,   and 

split   down    back.       Soak    them    for 

an  hour  in  olive  oil  that  is  seasoned 

with     an     onion     sliced,     some     salt, 

pepper,     parsley     and     lemon    juice. 

Lift    them    from    this    dressing,    and 

without  wiping  at  all,  but  sprinkling 

over  them  a  little  flour,  set  to  broil 

over  a  clear  fire.     Melt  4  tablespoons 

Crisco,   add   to  it  juice  of  1   lemon, 

glass    of    Madeira     and     tablespoon 

cooked  ham  chopped  as  finely  as  it  is 

possible  to  get  it.     Have  this  sauce 

hot,    and    put    over    chickens    when 

taking  them  up. 

April  28 

Clam  Cocktail 
Shad,  Stuffed  and  Baked, 

Brown  Butter  Sauce 
Mashed  Potatoes 
Beets  Stuffed  with  Peppers 
*Caramel  Custard 
Coffee 
*Caramel  Custard — i  eggs  and  1  yolk, 
J4  cup  sugar,  1  pint  milk,  and  1  tea- 
spoon lemon  extract.  Have  plain  tin 
pudding  mold,  put  3  tablespoons  sugar 
into  small  saucepan  and  stir  till  it 
becomes  quite  brown  like  cofl^ee. 
Pour  this  into  mold  and  run  it  all 
over  bottom  of  it.  Crisco  then  sides 
of  mold,  beat  eggs  and  sugar  to- 
gether till  mixed  well,  then  add  milk 
and  flavoring.  Pour  all  into  pre- 
pared mold,  cover  with  piece  of 
Criscoed  paper;  have  stewpan  with 
an  inch  of  boiling  water  in  it;  put 
saucer  or  something  flat  in  bottom 
of  it,  set  pudding  tin  on  this,  and 
cover  pan  with  lid.  Let  steam 
slowly  for  at  least  1  hour.  It  must 
not  boil,  but  be  set  on  part  of  stove 


178 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


where  it  will  keep  hot  without 
boiling.  Turn  out  and  serve  hot  or 
cold. 


April  29 


Vegetarian 


Cream  of  Salsify  Soup 

Nut  Sausage,  Brown  Sauce 

Grilled  Sweet  Potatoes 

*Sour  Cabbage 

Apple  and  Prune  Tart 

Coffee 

*Sour  Cabbage — 2  quarts  chopped  cab- 
bage,   2    tablespoons    Crisco  ,  }4    cup 
vinegar,  salt  and  pepper  to  taste. 
Soak    cabbage    in    cold    water    for 

1  hour;  drain;  place  it  in  an  un- 
covered kettle  of  boiling  salted 
water,  cook  20  minutes;  drain  and 
return  to  kettle.  Add  vinegar,  bring 
cabbage  to  boiling-point  and  cook  5 
minutes.  Add  Crisco,  salt  and 
pepper  to  taste. 

April  30 

*  Pepper  Pot 

Mutton  Cutlets,  Tomato  Sauce 

New  Potatoes  Lima  Beans 

Sliced    Tomato  Salad 

Cheese  Fingers      Violet  Mousse 

Coffee 

*Pepper  Pot — A     small     knuckle     of 

veal,  1  pound  cooked  tripe,  1  onion, 

2  medium-sized  potatoes,  1  bunch 
pot  herbs,  1  cup  Crisco,  3  quarts 
cold  water. 

Wash  veal  and  pot  herbs  and  slice 
onion,  put  them  with  water,  in  soup 
kettle,  on  back  of  stove,  where  they 
will  come  gradually  to  boiling 
point.  Allow  to  simmer  4  hours  or 
more.  Strain  and  set  away  to  cool. 
This  must  be  done  day  before  it  is 
wanted.  When  cold,  skim  off  every 
particle  of  fat,  add  to  it  potatoes, 
cut  in  small  cubes,  tripe,  cut  in  ^ 
inch  squares,  bay  leaf,  few  sprigs 
parsley  chopped  fine,  and  meat  cut 
from  knuckle,  rejecting  every  bit  of 
fat  and  gristle.  Put  them  on  to 
boil  just  long  enough  before  dinner 
to  cook  potatoes;  when  boiling  season 
to  taste   with   salt   and   red   pepper. 


Thicken  soup  with  one  teaspoon  each 
flour  and  cornstarch  mixed  smooth 
with  little  water.  Mix  Crisco  with 
1  cup  flour,  yi  teaspoon  salt  and  little 
pepper,  and  enough  cold  waterto  make 
dough  stiff  enough  to  roll  out,  cut  in 
small  squares  and  boil  in  soup  14  hour. 

May  1 

Beef  Soup  Noodles 

Roast  Beef  Yorkshire  Pudding 

Browned  Potatoes 

*Canned  Corn  Pudding 

Spinach  and  Egg  Salad 

Strawberry  Sherbet        Coffee 

*Canned  Corn  'Pudding — 1  can  corn, 

1  cup  hot  milk,  }i  teaspoon  salt,  j4 

teaspoon  sugar,  1  tablespoon  Crisco, 

1  tablespoon  flour,  and  1  egg. 

Melt  Crisco;  mix  well  with  flour; 
add  the  milk  gradually,  then  the 
seasoning  and  corn,  and  last  of  all 
beaten  egg.  Pour  into  Criscoed 
baking  dish  and  bake  in  moderate 
oven  for  ^  hour. 

May  2 

Porterhouse  Steak 

Scalloped  Potatoes  with  Onion 

Artichokes,  Hollandaise  Sauce 

*  Daisy  Salad 

Roquefort  Cheese 

Lemon  Ice  Cream  with  Grated  Pineapple 

Coffee 
*Daisy  Salad — Arrange  around  bor- 
der of  salad  plates  a  row  of  crispy 
lettuce  leaves,  and  in  the  center 
put  a  tablespoon  of  dressing.  This 
makes  center  of  daisy.  Around  this 
put  petals  made  by  cutting  into 
narrow  strips  whites  of  hard-cooked 
eggs.  Take  yolks  of  these  eggs  and 
put  through  strainer,  scattering  over 
dressing  in  center  to  give  a  rough 
appearance.  This  will  require  about 
five  hard-cooked  eggs. 

The  dressing  for  the  center  is  made 
as  follows:  Beat  together  3  eggs,  add 
to  them  1  cup  milk,  2  tablespoons 
vinegar,  J^  teaspoon  salt,  2  table- 
spoons Crisco,  2  teaspoons  mustard 
mixed  to  paste  with  2  teaspoons 
water,  and  pepper  to  taste.  Bring  to 
boiling  point. 


179 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


May  3 

Normandy  Soup 

*Feal  Loaf,  Brown  Sauce 

String  Beans  Baked  Tomatoes 

Mexican  Salad 

Cheese  Fingers 

Vbnilla  Ice  Cream        Strawberry  Tarts 

Coffee 

*Veal  Loaf — 1  pound  cold  roast  veal 
finely  chopped,  yi  pound  sausage 
meat,  2  tablespoons  Crisco,  4  table- 
spoons breadcrumbs,  Y^  cup  stock 
or  gravy,  1  egg,  salt  and  pepper  to 
taste. 

Mix  veal,  sausage  meat,  Crisco, 
and  breadcrumbs  together,  •  season 
liberally  with  salt  and  pepper,  and 
add  egg.  Mix  thoroughly  and  add 
gravy  or  stock  gradually  until  it  is 
thoroughly  moistened.  Form  into  a 
short  thick  roll,  cover  lightly  with 
flour,  or,  when  economy  is  not  an 
object,  coat  with  egg  and  bread- 
crumbs. Bake  in  moderate  oven  for 
1  hour,  basting  occasionally  with 
hot  Crisco,  and  serve  hot  with 
brown  sauce. 

May  4 

Clear  Gravy  Soup 

*Crown  of  Lamb  with  Peas 

Potato  Croquettes  Cauliflower 

Bird's  Nest  Salad 

Cheese  Custard 

Sultana  Roll,  Strawberry  Sauce 

Coffee 

*Crown  of  Lamb  with  Peas — Select 
parts  from  2  loins  containing  ribs, 
scrape  flesh  from  bone  between  ribs, 
as  far  as  lean  meat  and  trim  off 
backbone.  Shape  each  piece  in  semi- 
circle, having  ribs  outside  and  sew 
pieces  together  to  form  a  crown. 
Trim  ends  of  bones  evenly  and  rather 
short  and  wrap  each  bone  in  thin 
strip  fat  scraps  to  prevent  bone  from 
burning.  Place  on  lack  in  dripping 
pan  with  bowl  in  center  of  crown  to 
preserve  its  shape.  Dredge  with 
flour,  sprinkle  with  salt  and  pepper, 
basting  frequently  with  melted  Cris- 
co,  and   allowing  9   minutes  to  the 


pound  for  roasting.  Cover  bones 
with  Criscoed  paper.  Remove  paper 
from  bones  before  serving  and  till 
the  center  with  peas.  Place  paper 
frills  on  chop  bones  and  parsley 
around  base.  The  center  of  crown 
may  be  filled  -with  potato  balls, 
French  fried  potatoes,  or  puree  of 
chestnuts. 

May  5 

*Hotch  Potch 

Baked  Ham  in  Pastry 

Mashed  Turnips  Potato  Balls 

Stuffed  Tomato  Salad 

Caramel  Ice  Cream  Cake 

Coffee 

*Hotch   Potch — J^  cup    pearl    barley, 

1  small  cabbage,  2  carrots,  1  turnip, 

2  onions,  parsley  and  herbs,  4  table- 
spoons Crisco,  salt  and  pepper  to 
taste,  and  3  quarts  water.  Put 
barley  on  fire  with  cold  water. 
Scrape  or  grate  one  of  carrots,  and 
put  it  aside  in  little  water.  Chop  all 
rest  of  vegetables  very  small,  and 
when  water  boils  put  t^em  in  with 
Crisco,  salt  and  pepper.  There 
should  be  enough  vegetables  to  make 
it  rather  thick.  Boil  for  2  hours,  then 
add  scraped  carrots,  and  boil  for 
another  }4  hour.  Many  other  vege- 
tables may  be  added.  Lettuce,  green 
peas,  and  celery  when  in  season. 

May  6 

Pear  and  Ginger  Cocktail 

Tomato  and  Vermicelli  Soup 

Broiled  Beefsteak 

*French  Fried  Potataes 

Lettuce  Salad 

Lemon  Pudding,  White  Sauce 

Coffee 

*French  Fried  Potatoes — Wash  and 
pare  small  potatoes,  cut  in  eighths 
lengthwise,  and  soak  1  hour  in  cold 
water.  Take  from  water,  dry  be- 
tween towels,  and  fry  in  deep  Crisco. 
Drain  on  brown  paper  and  sprinkle 
with  salt.  To  test  Crisco.  heat  until 
a  crumb  of  bread  becomes  a  golden 
brown  in  20  seconds. 


180 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


May  7 

*Tomato  Pot  Roast 

Beet  Greens  Boiled  Potatoes 

Spring  Salad 

Rhubarb  Tutti  Frutti 

Maple  Gingerbread 

Cofee 

*Tomato  Pot  Roast — Rub  over  with 
flour  surface  of  a  4-pound  piece  of 
beef  cut  from  lower  round,  and  season 
it  with  salt  and  pepper.     Finely  chop 

2  onions  and  fry  them  until  brown  in 

3  tablespoons  melted  Crisco.  Re- 
move onions,  put  in  meat,  and  cook 
it  until  well  browned  on  all  sides. 
Add  can  of  tomatoes  and  2  quarts 
water,  cover,  and  let  simmer  for 
about  2  hours,  or  until  meat  is  ten- 
der. Remove  meat;  thicken  and 
strain  liquor.  Cut  meat  in  slices 
and  serve  in  sauce,  or  use  cold  for 
lunch. 

May  8 

Cream  of  Beet  Soup 

Cold  Pot  Roast         Stuffed  Potatoes 

String  Bean  Salad         Stewed  Apricots 

*Black  Chocolate  Cake 

Coffee 

*Black  Chocolate  Cake — \}i  cups 
sugar,  2  eggs,  yi  cup  Crisco,  4  squares 
chocolate,  1>^  cups  flour,  measured 
after  sifting,  3  teaspoons  baking 
powder,  1  teaspoon  salt,  ^  cup  milk, 
and  1  teaspoon  vanilla. 

Cream  Crisco  and  sugar,  add  well 
beaten  eggs,  then  chocolate  melted, 
beat  thoroughly.  Sift  salt  and  bak- 
ing powder  with  flour  and  add  al- 
ternating with  milk  to  previous  mix- 
ture. Add  flavoring  last  and  beat 
thoroughly  before  pouring  into  a 
pan  well  greased  with  Crisco.  Bake 
in  a  moderate  oven  about  40  minutes. 

May  9 

Broiled  Bluefish 

*Souffle  Potatoes,  Canadian  Style 

Spinach  Radish  Roses 

Coffee  Jelly,  Whipped  Cream 

Sponge  Cakes       Coffee 

*Souffie  Potatoes,  Canadian  Style — 
Select  6  large  even -sized  potatoes, 
wash  and  scrub  them,  and  when  dry 


bake  them  in  hot  oven  until  done. 
Cut  off  small  portion  of  skin  and  re- 
move inside  part  while  hot.  Rub 
this  quickly  through  sieve  into  a 
basin,  add  1  tablespoon  cream,  1 
tablespoon  Crisco,  salt,  pepper,  nut- 
meg to  taste,  and  work  in  4  yolks 
of  eggs. 

Beat  whites  of  eggs  to  stiff  froth, 
and  stir  lightly  into  mixture.  Fill 
potato  shells  with  this,  and  bake 
slowly  for  about  ^  hour,  or  long 
enough  for  mixture  to  rise,  and 
surface  of  it  to  brown.  If  liked,  a 
little  grated  cheese  can  be  incor- 
porated with  mixture  and  sprinkled 
over  top  of  potatoes  just  before 
baking  second  time. 

May  10 

Haricot  Soup 
Rice  Fritters        Tomatoes  au  Gratiti 
*Baked  Bananas 
Bread  Cheese 

Coffee 
*Baked  Bananas — Remove  skins  from 
7  bananas  and  cut  in  halves  length- 
wise. Put  in  shallow  granite  pan  or 
on  an  old  platter.  Mix  2  tablespoons 
melted  Crisco,  y^  cup  sugar,  and  2 
tablespoons  lemon  juice.  Baste  ba- 
nanas with  yz  the  mixture.  Bake  20 
minutes  in  slow  oven,  basting  during 
baking  with  remaining  mixture. 

May  11 

Fish  Soup 
Salt  Cod  Fish  Balls 
Steamed  Brown  Bread 
Dressed  Shredded  Cabbage 
*Cream  Pie 
Coffee 
*Cream    Pie — 3   eggs,   3    tablespoons 
sugar,   3  tablespoons    flour,  1    table- 
spoon Crisco,  \}4  pints  milk,  and   1 
teaspoon  lemon  extract. 

Mix  sugar  and  flour  and  then 
put  into  a  saucepan,  then  add  yolks 
of  eggs,  Crisco,  milk  and  flavoring. 
Stir  constantly  until  it  thickens  and 
then  divide  into  2  baked  pie  crusts 
and  cover  with  a  meringue  made  of 
whites  of  eggs. 


181 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


May  12 

Fried  Fishy  Tartare  Sauce 
Calves'  Tongues  Sorrel  Puree 

French    Pigeon    Pie 
*  Macaroni,  a  I'ltalienne 
Polish  Salad 
Apricot  Parfait 
Coffee 
*Macaroni,  a   I'ltalienne — yi   pound 
macaroni,     2     tablespoons     flour,     2 
tablespoons  Crlsco,  salt  and  paprika 
to  taste,  yi  cup  brown  stock,  |^  cup 
tomato    pulp,     and     }4    cup    grated 
cheese.     Make  sauce  of  Crisco,  flour 
seasonings,  stock,   and  tomato  pulp. 
Tomato  pulp  should   be  quite  thick 
from  long  cooking.      Add   macaroni, 
cooked  until  tender,  in  boiling  salted 
water,   rinsed   and   drained.      Reheat 
in  double  boiler,  adding  cheese  mean- 
while.    Serve  when  cheese  is  melted 
and  whole  is  very  hot. 

May  13 

Grilled  Salmon 

Cucumber  Potatoes 

Galantine  of  Beef,  Aspic  Jelly 

Vegetable  Salad 
'*-Fruit  Tart  Custard 

Coffee 
♦/rtti/rar/— 2  pounds  fruit,  1  cup  sugar, 
ginger,  2  cups  flour,  6  tablespoons 
Crisco,  and  baking  powder.  If  tart 
is  to  be  made  of  rhubarb,  it  should 
we  well  washed  (not  skinned)  and 
cut  up  in  inch  lengths,  packed 
tightly  into  dish,  sugar  sprinkled 
among  it,  also  ya  teaspoon  ground 
ginger.  If  made  of  gooseberries, 
they  should  be  picked  clean,  washed, 
and  put  in  dish  with  little  cinnamon. 
If  apples  are  used,  they  must  be 
peeled  and  sliced  very  thinly,  sugar 
sprinkled  among  them,  and  little 
lemon  peel  grated,  or  ^  teaspoon 
ground  cinnamon.  In  no  case  put 
water  in.  Paste.  Put  flour  in  basin 
with  dessertspoon,  sugar,  }4  teaspoon 
baking  powder,  6  tablespoons  Crisco, 
and  crumble  latter  among  flour  until 
all  lumps  have  disappeared,  then 
pour  in  cold  water  to  make  stiff 
paste;    turn    it    out    on    board    and 


roll  it  a  little  larger  than  size  of  dish; 
after  wetting  it,  cut  off  band  of 
paste  to  put  round  edge  of  dish;  wet 
band  again  and  place  remainder 
paste  on.  Press  it  down  very  lightly, 
to  make  edges  adhere;  pare  and  notch 
them  neatly  according  to  taste;  brush 
top  with  cold  water,  and  dust  fine 
sugar  over,  then  put  in  oven  to  bake 
for  I  hour.  When  fruit  tart  begins  to 
boil  out  at  side  it  is  usually  ready. 

May  14 

*Spring  Soup 

Slices  of  Galantine  of  Beef 

Lettuce  and  Egg  Salad 

Cheese  Toast 
Bananas  in  Custard 
Coffee 
*Spring  Soup — 1  large  lettuce,  12 
spring  onions,  2  tablespoons  Crisco, 
1  pint  milk,  I  pint  stock  or  water,  1 
tablespoon  cornstarch,  parsley,  salt, 
nutmeg,  croutons  of  bread  and  sugar. 
Wash  lettuce  and  onions,  shred 
lettuce  and  slice  onions  thinly. 
Melt  Crisco  in  saucepan,  and  fry 
lettuce  and  onions  for  about  5  min- 
utes; add  stock  and  part  of  milk,  and 
let  simmer  gently  for  10  minutes. 
Mix  cornstarch  with  remainder  of 
milk,  pour  into  soup  and  stir  until  it 
boils,  simmer  for  another  10  min- 
utes; season  to  taste  with  pepper, 
salt,  sugar,  and  little  nutmeg.  Cut 
some  crust  of  bread  into  thin  strips 
and  dry  quite  crisp  in  oven;  put  them 
into  tureen  with  parsley  picked 
small,  and  pour  soup  over.  Water- 
cress, endive,  or  sorrel  may  be  used 
either  along  with,  or  in  place  of,  the 
lettuce  for  a  change. 

May  IS 

Julienne  Soup 

"Bobotee 

Boiled  Potatoes       Beans 

Cream  Cheese  and  Pimiento  Salad 

Blanc-mange  and  Stewed  Fruit 

Coffee 

*Bobotee — 1  pound  lean  beef  or  mu'- 

ton,   6   ounces   bread,   8   tablespoons 

Crisco,  4   onions,   4   tablespoons   al- 


182 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


tnonds,  1  tablespoon  vinegar,  1 
tablespoon  curry  powder,  1  table- 
spoon sugar,  2  teaspoons  salt,  and 
4  eggs. 

Soak  bread  in  milk,  then  squeeze 
it,  mince  meat.  Chop  onions  and 
fry  in  hot  Crisco,  keeping  them  of  a 
pale  color,  add  bread,  curry,  sugar, 
vinegar,  and  salt,  then  well  mix  in 
meat  and  eggs  beaten.  Crisco  a  pud- 
ding dish.  Bake  from  20  to  30  min- 
utes. Serve  in  pudding  dish  gar- 
nished with  slices  of  lemon  and  par- 
sley. Can  be  eaten  either  hot  or 
cold. 

May  16 

*Chipped  Beef  in  Cream 

Baked  Potatoes 

Lettuce  and  Radish  Salad 

Cheese  Balls 

Frozen  Macedoine 

Coffee 

*Chipped  Beef  in  Cream — Make  white 
sauce  using  8  tablespoons  Crisco,  8 
tablespoons  flour,  3  cups  milk  and 
1  cup  cream.  To  it  add  }4  pound 
dried  beef  broken  into  small  pieces. 
Cook  about  S  minutes  and  just  before 
serving  pour  very  slowly  on  to  2  well 
beaten  eggs.    Serve  at  once. 

May  17 

Fruits 

*Spanish  Omelet  Molded  Spinach 

New  Potatoes 

Corn  Salad  Cheese  Sticks 

Frozen  Souffle 

Coffee 

*Spanish  Omelet — 1  green  pepper,  1 
red  pepper,  1  onion,  3  tablespoons 
Crisco,  6  mushrooms,  6  eggs,  6  table- 
spoons water,  salt  and  pepper  to 
taste. 

Put  J^  Crisco  in  saucepan,  add 
onion  chopped  very  fine,  mushrooms 
and  red  and  green  pepper;  cover, 
cook  slowly  for  20  minutes.  Make 
plain  omelet  from  rest  of  ingredi- 
ents; turn  this  out  on  heated  dish, 
fill  ends  of  dish  or  platter  with. 
Spanish  sauce,  and  send  it  to  table. 


This  omelet  can  be  made  very  hand- 
some by  saving  >^  of  green  and  red 
pepper,  cutting  it  into  fancy  shapes 
to  use  a  garnish  for  top  of  omelet. 

May  18 

Stratoberries 

Lentil  Soup,  au  Maigre 

^Scalloped  Clams         Stewed  Tomatoes 

Beet  and  Cabbage  Salad 

Vanilla   Ice  Cream 

Maple  Sauce 

Coffee 

^Scalloped  Clams — Chop  25  clams 
fine  and  season  with  red  pepper  and 
salt  to  taste.  Blend  together  1  table- 
spoon each  Crisco  and  flour,  and  cook 
with  1  cup  liquid,  half  milk  and  half 
clam  juice,  with  a  tiny  pinch  of 
soda,  and  stir  until  smooth  and 
creamy.  Add  chopped  clams  with  1 
beaten  egg.  Have  ready  large  clam 
or  scallop  shells,  Crisco  on  inside 
and  fill  with  clam  mixture,  smoothing 
over  with  silver  knife  blade.  Ar- 
range on  baking  dish  and  bake  about 
6  minutes,  or  until  well  browned. 
Garnish  with  parsley  and  pass  sliced 
lemons  with  them. 

May  19 

Grape  Fruit 
Cream  of  Celery  Soup 

*Sweetbreads 

Creamed  New  Potatoes 

Green  Peas  Carrots 

Hot  Biscuit 

Fruit  Salad  Orange  Ice 

Sunshine  Cake 

Coffee 

^Sweetbreads — Clean  and  soak  2  pairs 
of  sweetbreads  in  cold  water  for  an 
hour  or  more,  then  put  them  in  pan 
with  enough  water  to  cover  them, 
and  cook  them  for  20  minutes. 
Take  them  out  and  place  them  in 
cold  water  for  2  or  3  minutes  to  make 
them  firm.  Dry  thoroughly,  rub 
them  with  tablespoon  of  Crisco. 
Sprinkle  with  salt  and  pepper  and 
place  in  a  pan  with  brown  sauce. 
Cook  in  hot  oven  for  20  minutes. 
Baste  often  with  the  sauce. 


183 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


May  20 

Cream  of  Pea  Soup  Croutons 

Stuffed  Eggs,  Tartare  Sauce 
Baked  Bananas  Potato  Fluff 

*Onions  Stuffed  with  Nuts 
Apple  Salad 
Coffee     ■ 
*Onions  Stuffed  with    Nuts — 2   large 
Spanish     onions,     or     6     good-sized 
Bermuda  onions,  1  cup  boiled  rice,  1 
cup  chopped   English  walnut  meats, 
mixed   with   1   teaspoon  salt,   1   salt- 
spoon  pepper,  and  1  raw  egg. 

Put  onions,  without  peeling  into 
a  saucepan  of  boiling  water;  add  half 
the  salt  and  boil  for  ^  an  hour. 
Drain  and  dry.  Remove  outside 
skin,  and  with  handle  of  a  teaspoon, 
take  out  center,  saving  it  for  the 
sauce.  Mix  nuts,  rice,  seasoning  and 
egg;  fill  this  into  onions;  stand  them 
in  baking  pan,  brush  with  melted 
Crisco  and  bake  in  moderate  oven 
for  y2  hour.  Chop  very  fine  the 
portion  that  you  have  taken  from 
center,  press  it  through  a  sieve,  add 
this  pulp  to  a  cup  of  tartare  sauce 
and  pour  it  into  a  sauceboat.  Serve 
onions  on  platter;  pass  the  sauce. 

May  21 

Oloronnaise  Potage 
Broiled  Shad  Roe         *Anna  Potatoes 
Duckling  Braise  with  Cherries 
Fresh  Asparagus,  Swiss 
Weimar  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Anna     Potatoes — Peel,     wash     and 
drain  4  good-sized,   sound,   raw   po- 
tatoes.    Slice  them  with  a  Saratoga- 
chip  potato  machine.     If  none  is  at 
hand,  slice  them  as  fine  as  possible. 
Grate  2  ounces  of  Parmesan  or  Swiss 
cheese.     'Heat   2   tablespoons   Crisco 
in   a   small   frying   pan,   remove   pan 
from    fire    and    cover    bottom    with 
light  layer  of  potatoes.    Mix  teaspoon 
salt  with  2  saltspoons  white  pepper, 
sprinkle  a  little  over  potatoes,  spread 
a    little    cheese    over    potatoes,    and 
place  few  bits  Crisco  over  cheese.    Ar- 
range another  layer  of  potatoes — and 
so  on  till   all   are  employed.     Cover 
pan,  place  on  moderate  fire  for  S  min- 


utes. Turn  them  over  with  cake  tur- 
ner; let  them  cook  again  3  minutes, 
then  place  in  hot  oven  for  10  min- 
utes.    Turn  on  hot  dish  and  serve. 

May  22 

Little  Neck  Clams 

Parmentier  Puree 

Veal  Cutlets 

Mashed  Potatoes       *Spinach,  Martha 

Chicory  Salad 

Biscuit  Tortoni 

Coffee 

*Spinach,  Martha — Trim  off  stalks  of 

3  quarts  fresh  spinach,  discarding 
stale  leaves  if  any.  Thoroughly 
wash  and  drain,  plunge  in  gallon  boil- 
ing water  with  1  tablespoon  salt  and 
boil  for  10  minutes.  Take  them  up 
with  skimmer,  drain  on  sieve,  press 
out  all  water,  chop  finely,  place  in 
saucepan.  Cut  3  slices  bread  in  ^ 
inch  square  pieces,  place  on  plate, 
pour  over  them  1  tablespoon  vinegar, 
then  brown  them  in  small  frying  pan 
with  1  tablespoon  melted  Crisco  to 
golden  color,  add  them  to  spinach, 
with  2  hard-cooked  eggs  cut  into  8 
pieces  each,  1  tablespoon  Crisco,  salt, 
sugar,  grated    nutmeg   to   taste,  and 

4  tablespoons  cream.  Mix  well  with 
wooden  spoon  and  cook  10  minutes, 
lightly  mixing  once  in  a  while,  dress 
on  vegetable  dish  and  serve. 

May  23 

Potage,  a  la  Monaco 
*Mackerel,    Cold,    Vinaigrette 

Cucumbers,  Bechamel  Sauce 
Tomato  and  Artichoke  Salad 
Monte  Carlo  Pie 
Coffee 

*Mackerel,  Cold,  Vinaigrette — Select 
fine  mackerel;  clean,  leaving  head  on, 
wrap  in  piece  of  cheesecloth,  and 
boil  in  strong  solution  of  vinegar  and 
water  until  tender,  taking  care  that 
it  does  not  cook  too  long.  IS  to  25 
minutes  should  be  sufficient.  Make 
a  vinaigrette  sauce  with  >^  cup  tar- 
ragon vinegar,  1  cup  melted  Crisco, 
1  teaspoon  made  mustard,  1  teaspoon 
chopped  parsley,  1  teaspoon  chopped 


184 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


shallots,  and  2  teaspoons  chopped 
capers.  Put  vinegar  into  basin,  add 
mustard,  little  salt,  stir  in  Crisco  and 
chopped  ingredients.  Mix  well  to- 
gether, lay  mackerel,  after  removing 
from  cloth,  on  long  platter,  pour  over 
vinaigrette  sauce  and  let  marinate 
thoroughly,  putting  in  refrigerator 
as  soon  as  cool.  Serve  ice  cold  in 
bed  of  parsley,  garnished  with  lemon 
slices,  and  pass  vinaigrette  sauce 
with  it. 

May  24 

*  Puree,  a  VIndienne 

Lamb  Stew  with  Dumplings 

Lettuce,  French  Dressing 

Cheese  Balls 

Snow  Pudding 

Cofee 

*Puree,  a  VIndienne — 2  large  apples, 
4  tablespoons  Crisco,  1  large  onion, 
1  large  carrot,  1  turnip,  white  2  leeks, 

1  stalk  celery,  sprig  parsley,  I  bay 
leaf,  1  tablespoon  cocoanut,  juice  }4 
lemon,  1  tomato,  1  teaspoon  salt,  }4 
teaspoon  red  pepper,  1  tablespoon 
curry  powder,  1  teaspoon  curry  paste, 
}4  cup  cream,  some  boiled  rice,  and 

2  quarts  of  water. 

Melt  Crisco,  cut  up  all  vegetables 
(prepared)  into  rough  pieces,  fry 
them  a  little  in  hot  Crisco,  add  also 
curry  powder,  and  fry  it.  Do  not 
peel  apples;  simply  wipe,  cut  up  and 
add  with  vegetables.  When  fried 
for  7  minutes,  add  all  ingredients 
except  cream,  simmer  till  soft,  then 
rub  all  through  fine  sieve,  return  to 
pan  to  reheat,  and  gently  add  cream. 
Serve  rice  on  paper  mat,  as  croutons 
are  served  with  most  soups. 

May  25 

*Fish  Chowder 

Cucumber  and  Tomato  Salad 

Cheese  Croquettes 

Bakewell  Pudding 

Cofee 

*Fish  Chowder — 1  white  fish  weighing 
5  pounds,  4  cups  potato  dice,  yi  cup 
onion   dice,    yi    cup   salt   pork   dice, 


salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper  to 
taste,  4  cups  hot  water,  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  4  tablespoons  flour,  4  cups 
milk,  and  10  buttered  crackers. 
Remove  head  and  skin  and  cut  fish 
into  fillets.  Cover  head,  skin  and 
bones  with  cold  water;  simmer  20 
minutes,  strain.  Reserve  liquor. 
Parboil  potatoes  10  minutes.  Cook 
onion  in  salt  pork  until  yellow. 
Arrange  in  layers,  fish,  potatoes, 
onions  and  salt  pork;  cover  with 
water  in  which  bones  were  cooked, 
and  simmer  until  potatoes  are  ten- 
der. Thicken  milk  with  Crisco  and 
flour  cooked  together,  combine  mix- 
tures, add  seasonings,  and  pour 
over  buttered  crackers  which  have 
been  previously  soaked  in  cold  milk. 
Do  not  allow  onion  or  salt  pork  to 
burn. 

May  26 

*Turnip  Soup 

Beefsteak  and  Kidney  Pie 

Potatoes  Peas 

Lettuce  Salad 

Caramel  Trifle 

Coffee 

*Turnip  Soup — Take  2  pounds  of 
peeled  turnips,  cut  into  small  squares, 
place  in  a  stewpan  with  4  table- 
spoons Crisco,  stir  them  over  a  quick 
fire,  add  pinch  salt,  1  tablespoon  flour, 
add  3  pints  of  stock,  simmer  gently 
for  \j4  hours,  and  pass  whole  through 
a  sieve.  Put  back  in  stewpan,  and  add 
little  seasoning.  Bring  to  boil,  and 
just  before  sending  to  table  add  1 
cup  of  good  cream. 

May  27 

Chutney  Canapes 

Roast  Sirloin  of  Beef 

Franconia  Potatoes      Summer  Squash 

Olive  Salad 

Strawberry  Ice  Cream       *Genoa  Cake 

Coffee 

*Genoa  Cake — }4  pound  Crisco,  and 
>^  pound  butter.  Mix  to  a  cream 
with  }4  pound  sugar,  add  little  mace, 
stir  in  gradually  yolk  of  6  eggs  and 
K   beaten   whites,    10  ounces   flour. 


185 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


beat  well  for  1  minute,  add  1  pound 
raisins,  yi  pound  citron,  cut  very  fine, 
grated  rind  of  1  lemon,  and  2  ounces 
chopped  almonds.  Mix  well,  add  re- 
mainder of  beaten  whites  last.  Mix 
well,  put  in  pan  lined  with  paper, 
sprinkle  top  with  chopped  almonds 
and  bake  in  slow  oven. 

May  28 

Mock  Consomme 
Roast  Crown  of  Lamb, 

Currant  Mint  Sauce 
Potato  Balls  Peas 

Asparagus  on  Toast 

*Carrot  Salad 

Raspberry  Ice  Cream 

Cofee 

*Carrot  Salad — Scrape,  cut  into  slices 
and  then  into  fancy  shapes,  4  large 
carrots.  Soak  in  cold  water  for  ^ 
an  hour,  and  then  cook  in  boiling 
unsalted  water  until  tender.  Drain 
and  dry.  Line  salad  bowl  with  crisp 
lettuce  leaves,  and  arrange  on  top 
the  carrots.  Serve  with  following 
dressing:  Rub  sides  and  bottom  of 
bowl  with  clove  garlic,  add  salt  and 
pepper  to  taste  and  6  tablespoons 
melted  Crisco;  add  piece  of  ice,  if 
possible;  stir  until'  salt  is  dissolved, 
then  add  1  tablespoon  vinegar  or 
lemon  juice.  Beat  until  thick;  use 
at  once. 

May  29 

Raw  Clams 

Chicken  Pie 

*Stuffed  Potatoes        Broiled  Tomatoes 

Pepper  and  Cucumber  Salad 

Cheese  fingers 

Pineapple  Jelly 

Coffee 

*Stuffed  Potatoes — Bake  7  good-sized 
potatoes.  When  done,  cut  off  a  length- 
wise slice;  scoop  out  potato  with  a 
spoon.  Mash;  add  1  tablespoon 
Crisco,  salt  and  pepper  to  taste,  }i 
cup  milk,  and  2  egg  whites  beaten 
stiff.  Refill  skins  with  this  mixture. 
Pile  lightly,  do  not  smooth,  bake  until 
potatoes  are  puffed  and  brown. 


May  30 

Fruit  Soup 

Breaded  Mutton  Chops 

Potatoes  *Peas 

Tomato  Mayonnaise 

Banana  Charlotte  Russe 

Assorted  Cakes 

Cofee 

*Peas — 1  quart  cooked  green  peas, 
2  ounces  of  lean  cooked  ham  cut  into 
dice,  2  tablespoons  Crisco,  2  table- 
spoons good  stock,  1  teaspoon  flour, 
y^  small  onion  finely  chopped,  a 
pinch  of  sugar,  grated  nutmeg,  salt 
and  pepper  to  taste.  Fry  onion  until 
lightly  browned  in  Crisco,  add  flour 
and  ham,  stir  over  fire  for  a  minute 
or  two,  then  put  in  peas,  stock,  sugar, 
and  nutmeg.  Season  to  taste,  sim- 
mer for  ten  minutes,  stirring  oc- 
casionally, then  serve. 

May  31 

Milk  Soup 
*Beef  Loaf,  Brown  Sauce 
Potatoes  Tomatoes 

Radish   and    Watercress  Salad 
Vanilla  Pudding,  Jam  Sauce 
Coffee 
*Beef  Loaf — Mix   together   3    pounds 
chopped  raw  beef,  ^  pound  of  minced 
salt  pork,  1  cup  cracker  dust,  2  tea- 
spoons, each,  of  salt  and  pepper,  and 
moisten  all  with  2  beaten  eggs,  tea- 
spoonful   onion   juice,    and   teaspoon 
Worcestershire    sauce.      Work    in    2 
tablespoons  melted  Crisco,  and  pack 
in  a  Criscoed  mold.     Cover;  set  in  a 
roasting    pan   of   boiling  water,    and 
cook  in  a  steady  oven  for  2  hours. 
Serve  with  brown  sauce. 

June  1 

Curried  Lobster 
*Boiled  Stuffed  Leg  of  Lamb 
Potatoes         Scalloped  Sweet  Corn 
Cherry  Salad 
Frozen  Watermelon 
Coffee 
*Boiled  Stuffed  Leg   of  Lamb — Have 
small,   tender   leg   of  lamb,    and    re- 
move bone.     Make  forcemeat  of  }4 


186 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


pound  fresh  mushrooms  cut  in  pieces, 
y2  cup  chopped  boiled  ham,  H  C"P 
breadcrumbs,  and  2  tablespoons  melt- 
ed Crisco.  Season  with  pepper  and 
salt,  and  put  into  the  lamb  in  place 
of  removed  bone.  Tie  it  up  welj, 
wrap  in  piece  of  cheesecloth,  and  boil 
in  salted  water,  having  juice  >^ 
iemon,  1  onion,  and  few  branches  of 
parsley  in  it.  Serve  with  currant  jelly 
sauce;  that  is,  4  tablespoons  butter 
melted  together  with  }/2  tumbler  cur- 
rant jelly  and  ]4  glass  white  wine. 

June  2 

Green   Vegetable  Soup 
Fried  Chicken,  Virginia  Style 
Cornmeal  Bread  Broiled  Tomatoes 

Bean  Salad 
""Strawberry  Fritters 
Coffee 
*Strawberry  Fritters — Have  large,  ripe 
strawberries,  remove  hulls  and  clean 
them  thoroughly.  Moisten  each 
berry  with  little  brandy,  roll  in 
sugar  and  stand  till  berries  absorb 
considerable  sweetness.  Roll  them  in 
finest  possible  breadcrumbs  and  drop 
into  hot  Crisco.  Sprinkle  strawber- 
ries with  powdered  sugar  when  taking 
up,  and  serve  with  them  sweetened 
whipped  cream.  Care  must  be  taken 
that  strawberries  are  not  too  ripe. 
They  musfbe  quite  hard  and  firm  to 
be  perfectly  satisfactory  when  served. 

June  3 

*Crab  Soup 
Salmon,  la  Franc  esc  a 
Veal,  Roasted 
Chiffonade  Salad 
Cheese  Crackers 

Tipsy  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Crab  Soup — Remove  cooked  meat 
from  6  hard-shelled  crabs  and  chop 
finely.  Add  3  cups  white  stock,  ^ 
cup  stale  breadcrumbs,  1  slice  of  onion, 
1  sprig  of  parsley,  and  simmer  20 
minutes.  Blend  together  1  table- 
spoon Crisco  and  1  tablespoon  flour, 
and  add  1  cup  cream,  salt  and  red 
pepper  to  taste.  Combine  mixtures 
and  bring  to  boiling  point. 


June  4 

Boiled  Halibut,  Lobster  Sauce 
Beef  Roll  in  Jelly 
Italian  Risotto  *Fruit  Salad 

Manhattan  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Fruit  Salad — Mix  equal  parts 
shredded  fresh  or  preserved  pine- 
apple, bananas  in  small  pieces,  and 
sections  tangerines,  and  marinate 
together  in  French  dressing.  Fill 
banana  skins  with  mixture,  sprinkle 
generously  with  paprika,  arrange  on 
lettuce  leaves,  and  serve  with  French 
dressing. 

The  dressing  is  made  as  follows: 
Put4tablespoons  melted  Crisco  in  cold 
bowl;  if  possible,  put  in  small  piece 
ice.  Add  ^  teaspoon  salt,  saltspoon 
pepper,  and  stir  until  salt  is  dissolved, 
add  tablespoon  vinegar  or  lemon  juice. 
Beat  for  3  minutes  until  dressing  is 
as  thick  as  good  cream.    Use  at  once. 

June  5 

Grapefruit  Cocktail 
*  Roast  Duckling,  Apple  Sauce 
Rice  Fritters  Creamed  Carrots 

Macedoine  Salad  Wafers 
Cheese  Rhubarb  Meringue  Pie 
Coffee 
*Roast  Duckling^— This  is  prepared 
and_  trussed  similarly  to  goose,  but 
not' usually  stuffed.  Roast  from  30 
to  40  minutes.  Green  peas  are  the 
usual  accompaniment  to  roast  duck- 
ling. Serve  with  apple  sauce  which  is 
made  as  follows:  1  pound  cooking 
apples,  1  tablespoon  Crisco,  ^3  cup 
water,  and  sugar.  Peel,  core,  and 
slice  the  apples,  cook  them  in  a  stew- 
pan  with  water  and  Crisco,  add  a 
little  sugar  to  taste.  Stir  well,  or 
pass  through  a  sieve. 

June  6 

Hamburg  Steak,  Maitre  d'Hotel 

*  Asparagus  Baked  Potatoes 

Lettuce  and  Radish  Salad 

Strawberry  Mousse  Lady  Fingers 

Coffee 

*  Asparagus — Boil   2   cups   asparagus 
tips  in  salted  water  15  minutes.then 


187 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


drain  them;  while  they  are  cooking 
put  1  cup  milk  in  double  boiler,  and 
when  boiling  pour  some  of  it  on  2 
lightly  beaten  eggs,  stirring  vigor- 
ously meanwhile,  then  put  eggs  into 
double  boiler  with  milk,  and  stir  until 
it  begins  to  thicken.  Add  1  teaspoon 
Crisco,  salt  and  pepper  to  taste,  and 
remove  from  fire.  Cut  asparagus  tips 
into  }/2  inch  pieces  and  add  them  to 
sauce.  Take  6  stale  rolls,  cut  off  tops, 
remove  inside,  let  them  dry  in  oven; 
when  crisp  and  hot  fill  each  with  aspar- 
agus in  sauce,  replace  tops  and  serve. 

June  7 

Boiled  Salmon^  Egg  Sauce 

Creamed  Potatoes  New  Peas 

Dressed  Lettuce 

Cheese  Crackers 

*Chocolate  Bread  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Chocolate    Bread    Pudding — ^    cup 

breadcrumbs,    2    cups    scalded    milk, 

3  squares  melted  chocolate,  2  eggs,  1 
tablespoon  Crisco,  salt  to  taste,  }4 
teaspoon  vanilla,  ^  cup  cold  milk, 
^  cup  sugar  and  >^  cup  Sultana 
raisins.  Mix  all  ingredients  in  order 
given.  Pour  into  a  Criscoed  baking 
dish,  set  into  pan  of  hot  water,  and 
bake  1  hour  in  moderate  oven;  stir 
twice  during  baking  to  keep  choco- 
late from  rising  to  the  top. 

June  8 

Veal  Cutlet,  Brown  Gravy 

Mashed  Potatoes  *Glazed  Carrots 

Pea  Salad 

Cottage  Pudding,  Strawberry  Sauce 

Coffee 

*Glazed    Carrots — For     this,     carrots 

must  be  cut  into  even  cones  or  ovals, 

and  it  is  convenient  to  use  imported 

carrots  in  glass  bottles.     If  these  are 

used     they    are     already     boiled;    if 

fresh   carrots   are   used   scrape,   wash 

them  and  cut  out  little  shapes  with 

patent  cutter,  then  boil  slowly  until 

tender,  but  not  quite  done,  and  put 

4  cups  of  them  in  frying  pan  with  4 
tablespoons  melted  Crisco,  sprinkle 
with  fine  sugar,  and  stir  over  hot  fire 


until  they  begin  to  brown;  add  4 
tablespoons  stock  they  were  boiled 
in,  adding  more  stock  if  needed,  and 
continue  stirring  until  carrots  are 
nicely  glazed. 

June  9 

Roast  Beef 
Horseradish  Relish 
Asparagus  franconia  Potatoes 

Bean  Salad 

*Cherry  Pie 
Coffee 

*Cherry  Pie — 1  quart  ripe  cherries, 
1  yolk  egg,  3  tablespoons  cream, 
and  }4  cup  sugar.  Wash  cherries, 
stem  and  place  in  colander  over  dish 
to  catch  juice.  Place  thin  layer  of  the 
following  dough  on  shallow  pan, 
sprinkle  top  with  breadcrumbs. 
Spread  stoned  cherries  over  evenly. 
Sprinkle  with  sugar  and  cinnamon. 
Beat  yolk  well,  add  cream  and  cherry 
juice  and  pour  over  all.  Bake  in 
hot  oven  until  well  browned  at  bot- 
tom. 

The  dough  is  made  as  follows: 
1  tablespoon  Crisco,  1  cup  flour,  }4 
teaspoon  baking  powder,  }4  cup  sugar 
and  1  egg.  Mix  dry  ingredients. 
Work  in  Crisco  with  finger  tips;  add 
egg;  mix.  Toss  on  slightly  floured 
board  and  roll  a  >^  inch  thick. 
This  makes  enough  dough  for  a 
large  oblong  pan. 

June  10 

acotch  Broth 

Cold  Roast  Beef 

Creamed  Potatoes  *String  Beans 

Tomato  and  Olive  Salad 

Vanilla  Ice  Cream 

Crushed  Raspberries 

Coffee 

*String  Beans — If  fresh  beans  are 
used  pick  them  over,  remove  ends 
and  "strings,"  and  boil  for  ^  an 
hour  or  more;  then  drain  them,  and 
add  1  tablespoon  Crisco  and  2  table- 
spoons milk,  season  to  taste,  and 
serve  after  10  minutes'  slow  cooking. 
If  canned  beans  are  used  omit  the 
first  long  boiling. 


188 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


June  11 

Vegetable  Soup 

Broiled  Steak 

Stuffed  Tomatoes  Baked  Macaroni 

*  Pear  and  Pimiento  Salad 

Apricot  Blanc-mange  , 

Coffee 

*Pear  and  Pimiento  Salad — Fill  each 

canned  pimiento  with  2  halves  canned 

pears;  place  each  pimiento  in  nest  of 

lettuce     and     serve     with     following 

dressing:     Put  1  teaspoon  salt  and  1 

saltspoon  black  pepper  in  bowl,  and 

stir   into   them    with   wooden    spoon, 

very    slowly,    4    tablespoons    melted 

Crisco,  and  add  2  tablespoons  vinegar, 

mixing  it  well  with  Crisco. 

June  12 

Cream  of  Tomato  Soup 

*  Planked  Salmon  Potato  Balls 

Fresh  Green  Peas 

Lettuce  and  Cucumber  Salad 

Cheese  Bread-Sticks 
Lemon  Pudding  Coffee 
*Planked  Salmon — Have  salmon  cut 
in  steaks  1)4  or  2  inches  thick.  2 
steaks  of  average  size  can  be  placed  on 
medium-sized  plank.  Crisco  plank 
thoroughly,  place  fish  upon  it,  and 
broil  under  gas  broiler,  turning  flame 
low  after  first  few  moments.  Or  it 
can  be  baked  in  oven  of  range.  Serve 
on  plank,  surrounded  by  potato  balls 
cut  with  French  vegetable  cutter. 
Heat  }4  cup  cream,  add  salt  and  pep- 
per to  taste,  and  3  tablespoons  finely 
chopped  parsley.  Shake  potato  balls 
in  this  until  well  covered  with  season- 
ings. Serve  Hollandaise  sauce  with 
planked  salmon. 

June  13 

Strawberry  Cocktail 

Roast  Lamb,  Mint  Sauce 

Mashed  Potatoes         Carrots  and  Peas 

*Cherry  Roly  Poly 

Coffee 

*Cherry  Roly  Poly — Roll  pastry  or  a 

baking    powder    biscuit    dough    very 

thin,  about  J^  of  an  inch  in  thickness, 

sprinkle    with    sugar,    and    dot    with 

ripe    stoned    cherries.       Roll    like    a 


jelly  roll,  press,  and  close  the  ends 
as  tight  as  possible.  Tie  in  a  floured 
cloth,  and  cook  in  boiling  water  2 
hours,  or  steam  in  steamer  1  hour. 
Remove  from  cloth  and  serve  on 
hot  platter  with  the  following  sauce: 
}4  cup  Crisco,  1  cup  powdered  sugar, 
1  egg  yolk,  2  tablespoons  wine,  and  2 
egg  whites.  Cream  Crisco;  add 
sugar,  yolk  of  egg  and  wine.  Cook 
over  hot  water  until  hot.  Remove 
from  fire  and  add  beaten  whites  of 
eggs. 

June  14 

Roasted  Little  Neck  Clams 
*Salmi  of  Lamb 
fried  New  Potatoes 
Boiled  Bermuda  Onions 
Individual  Strawberry  Pies 
Coffee 
*Salmi  of  Lamb — Cut  cold  roast  lamb 
in    thin    slices.      Cook    5    minutes    2 
tablespoons    Crisco    with    ^    table- 
spoon   finely    chopped    onion.      Add 
lamb,  sprinkle  with  salt  and  pepper, 
and    cover    with    1    cup    cold    lamb 
gravy  seasoned   with   Worcestershire 
sauce.  .  Cook  until  thoroughly  heat- 
ed.    Arrange   slices   overlapping  one 
another  lengthwise   of  platter,   pour 
around     sauce,     and     garnish     with 
toast    points.      A    few    stoned    olives 
and  mushrooms  improve  this  sauce. 

June  15 

Cream  of  Pea  Soup 
*Baked  Brains 
Mashed  Potatoes 
Escalloped  Asparagus    Romaine  Salad 
Greengage  Ice  Cream 
Coffee 
*Baked  Brains — Prepare  brain  of  an 
ox    by    washing    and    skimming    it, 
and  then  steep  it  on   back  of  range 
for   1   hour.      Rub  it  with   flour  and 
salt,  lay  on  it  bits  of  Crisco,  and  set  in 
oven,  having  added  water  to  dish  in 
which  it  is  to  bake.     Bake  it  1  hour, 
basting  it  often,  and  serve  with  mush- 
room   sauce.      Onion    sauce   may   be 
substituted  for  the  mushroom  sauce. 


189 


A  Calendar  of  DinnefS 


June  16 

*Baked  Trout 

Chicken  Epicurean 

New  Potatoes     String  Beans  in  Cream 

Tomato  Salad 

Pineapple  Bisque 

Coffee 

*Baked  Trout — Clean  brook  trout, 
season  with  salt,  black  pepper,  and 
paprika.  Lay  in  Criscoed  baking  pan, 
dredge  with  flour,  sprinkle  with  chop- 
ped parsley  and  bits  of  Crisco,  pour 
over  little  vinegar  and  water,  and 
bake  in  hot  oven  until  done,  basting 
often  with  Crisco.  Garnish  with  pars- 
ley, and  serve  hot  with  cream  sauce. 

June  17 

Brunoise  Soup 

Porterhouse  Steak  Olives 

Stuffed  Potatoes    *Beans 

Belgian  Salad 

Compote  of  Cherries 

Coffee 

*Beans — Boil  1  quart  beans  until 
tender,  salting  them  well  when  half 
cooked.  Beat  1  tablespoon  Crisco  to 
a  cream,  beat  in  yolk  1  egg,  1  table- 
spoon finely  chopped  parsley,  1  salt- 
spoon  black  pepper,  and  2  teaspoons 
lemon  juice;  when  this  sauce  is  well 
mixed  stir  it  into  beans,  taking  care 
not  to  break  them,  then  serve. 

June  18 

Cream  of  Celery  Soup 

Stewed  Chicken 

Rice  Croquettes        Green  Peas 

*  Watercress  Salad 

Lemon  Jelly 

Iced  Coffee 

*  Watercress  Salad — Take  plenty  fresh 
young  sprigs  of  watercress,  wash  and 
dry  them  thoroughly,  put  them  light- 
ly in  dish,  add  3  sliced  shallots.  Pour 
over  them  dressing  made  with  3  parts 
melted  Crisco  and  1  of  lemon  juice  or 
vinegar.  Garnish  with  tufts  scraped 
horseradish. 


June  19 

Roast  Loin  of  Mutton 

Creamed  Spinach  Baked  Potatoes 

Pineapple  Charlotte 

*  Maids  of  Honor 

Coffee 

*Maids  of  Honor — Crisco  puff  pas- 
try, 4  tablespoons  sugar,  1  table- 
spoon ground  almonds,  2  eggs,  >^ 
teaspoon  vanilla,  4  tablespoons  melt- 
ed Crisco,  and  1  tablespoon  cocoa- 
nut.  Roll  out  Crisco  puff"  pastry 
and  line  8  gem  pans  with  it.  Put  eggs 
and  sugar  into  basin,  and  beat  them 
together  for  15  minutes;  then  stir  in 
lightly  Crisco,  ground  almonds,  co- 
coanut,  and  vanilla.  Put  3  teaspoons 
into  each  gem  pan  and  bake  in  a  mod- 
erate oven  for  20  minutes.  When 
cooked,  sprinkle  over  with  little  sugar. 


June  20 

*Cream   of  Cucumber  Soup 

Grilled  Salmon,  Mayonnaise  Sauce 

Lamb  Cutlets 

Green  Peas       Mashed  Potatoes 

Cold  Fruit  Souffle 

Coffee 

*Cream  of  Cucumber  Soup — 2  large 
cucumbers,  8  onions,  sprig  parsley, 
handful  spinach,  2  tablespoons  Crisco, 

1  tablespoon  cornstarch,  1  quart 
white  stock,  1  cup  milk,  2  cups  cream, 

2  yolks  eggs,  nutmeg,  1  teaspoon 
sugar,  pepper  and  salt  to  taste,  crou- 
tons. 

Peel  cucumbers  and  cut  firm  part 
into  dice,  about  3  tablespoons;  boil 
gently  in  salted  water  until  soft,  drain 
and  reserve  for  soup.  Cut  remainder 
cucumber  into  pieces,  cut  onions 
small.  Make  Crisco  hot  in  stewpan, 
fry  onions  and  cucumber  5  minutes, 
add  parsley  with  stock,  let  it  simmer 
20  minutes.  Mix  cornstarch  with 
milk,  stir  in  soup  until  it  boils,  let 
boil  10  minutes.  Well  wash  and  drain 
spinach,  pound  it  in  mortar,  turn  it 
into  cloth  and  squeeze  lightly  as  pos- 


190 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


sible.  Pour  as  much  of  this  liquor 
into  soup  as  will  make  it  a  delicate 
green  color.  Pass  soup  through  sieve, 
turn  it  back  into  stewpan.  Mix 
cream  and  yolks  of  eggs  in  basin,  pour 
boiling  soup  on  to  them,  stirring  at 
same  time,  return  to  pan;  it  must  not 
boil  again  or  it  will  curdle.  Season  to 
taste  with  nutmeg,  pepper,  and  salt. 
Cut  bread  into  dice,  fry  pale  color  in 
hot  Crisco,  drain  and  toss  them  in 
sugar,  sprinkle  little  red  pepper  over 
and  place  in  oven  2  minutes.  Warm 
dice  of  cucumber,  put  them  in  tureen 
with  croutons  and  pour  hot  soup  over 
and  serve. 


June  21 

Fried  Flounders,  Lemon  Sauce 

*Bee},  a  la  Mode 

Cauliflower  au  Gratin 

Creamed  Potatoes 

Fruit  Chartreuse 

Coffee 

*Beefy  a  la  Mode — 3  pounds  lean  beef, 
larding  bacon,  1  quart  stock,  1  glass 
claret,  3  tablespoons  Crisco,  4  table- 
spoons flour,  2  carrots,  1  chopped 
onion,  10  button  onions,  sprig  pars- 
ley, piece  thyme,  1  bay  leaf,  juice 
half  lemon,  2  cloves,  salt  and  pepper 
to  taste. 

Trim,  bone,  and  lard  meat,  place 
it  in  basin  with  wine,  lemon  juice, 
chopped  onion,  cloves,  salt,  pepper 
parsley,  thyme,  bay  leaf,  and  let  it 
stand  2  hours,  basting  frequently. 
Melt  Crisco  in  stewpan,  drain  beef, 
and  fry  it  brown,  and  at  same  time 
lightly  fry  button  onions.  Remove 
both  from  stewpan,  put  in  flour,  and 
fry  until  it  acquires  a  nut-brown  color; 
add  stock  and  wine  marinade  in  which 
meat  was  soaked,  and  stir  until  boiling. 
Replace  meat  and  onions,  season  to 
taste,  add  carrots  thinly  sliced,  cook 
gently  for  3  hours,  stirring  and  skim- 
ming occasionally.  When  done  place 
on  hot  dish,  strain  sauce  over,  and 
garnish  with  groups  of  onions  and 
carrots. 


June  22 

*Tournedos  of  Beef  with  Olives 

Braised  Lettuce         Baked  Potatoes 

Alligator  Pear  Salad 

Strawberry  Ice  Cream 

Coffee 

*Tournedos  of  Beef  with  Olives — 2 
pounds  fillet  beef,  8  croutons  fried 
bread,  2  tomatoes,  white  sauce, 
olives,  straw  potatoes,  4  tablespoons 
Crisco,  and  seasoning. 

Cut  fillet  in  slices  1  inch  thick, 
trim  into  small  rounds  with  cutter. 
Melt  Crisco  in  saute  pan,  fry  tour- 
nedos  quickly  and  brown  nicely, 
season  with  pepper  and  salt,  and 
dress  each  on  round  crouton  of  bread, 
cut  same  size  as  fillet,  and  fried.  On 
this  place  thin  slice  tomato  that  has 
been  slightly  cooked  in  Crisco;  in 
center  of  tomato  place  a  teaspoon 
white  sauce;  on  that,  again,  arrange 
olives.  Cut  potatoes  in  strips,  and 
fry  them  golden  brown  in  hot  Crisco; 
arrange  these  round  tournedos,  and 
serve   hot. 


June  23 

Soup  with  Marrow  Balls 

Sweetbread  Patties  Green  Peas 

Saratoga  Chips  Beet  Salad 

*  Raspberry  Batter  Pudding 

Coffee 

*  Raspberry  Batter  Pudding — 1  pint 
milk,  2  eggs,  4  tablespoons  flour, 
salt,  and  melted  Crisco.  Put  flour 
and  good  pinch  of  salt  into  a  basin, 
make  a  well  in  center,  break  in  eggs, 
stir,  gradually  mixing  in  flour  from 
sides,  and  add  milk  by  degrees  until 
a  thick,  smooth  batter  is  formed. 
Now  beat  well  10  minutes,  add  re- 
mainder of  milk;  cover,  and  let  stand 
for  at  least  1  hour.  When  ready  to 
use,  put  1  tablespoon  melted  Crisco 
into  pudding  dish,  and  while  it  is 
heating  give  batter  another  good 
beating.  Pour  into  dish,  and  bake  in 
quick  oven  for  35  minutes.  Serve 
with  raspberries  and  sugar. 


191 


A  Calendar  oj  Dinners 


June  24 

Puree  of  Peas 

Baked  Red  Snapper,  Tomato  Sauce 

Riced  Potatoes       Buttered  Beets 

Cabbage  Salad 

*Cup  Puddings 
Cofee 
*Cup  Puddings — These  should  be 
baked  in  little  cups  or  molds.  For 
1  pudding,  take  1  tablespoon  of  fol- 
lowing ingredients:  flour, Crisco,  milk, 
currants,  sugar. 

For  3  puddings  use  treble  quan- 
tities. Put  flour  into  a  basin  with 
a  pinch  of  salt,  together  with  cur- 
rants and  sugar;  melt  Crisco  to  pour 
in,  add  milk,  and  mix  well  together. 
Put  into  Criscoed  cups  and  bake  in  a 
moderate  oven  for  a  ^  of  an  hour. 
Tops  should  be  nicely  browned  when 
done.  These  puddings  are  nice 
either  hot  or  cold. 

June  25 

Soup  with  Bread  Balls 

Fried  Spring  Chicken,  Milk  Gravy 

New  Potatoes         Asparagus 

Tomato  Mayonnaise 

*  Rhubarb  Fanchonettes 
Coffee 
*  Rhubarb  Fanchonettes  —  2  pounds 
rhubarb,  1  cup  sugar,  f^  cup  strained 
orange  juice,  1  tablespoon  powdered 
gelatine,  1  piece  orange  peel,  1  cup 
cream,  whipped,  flavored  and  sweet- 
ened, number  of  individual  pastry 
shells. 

Cut  rhubarb  into  inch  pieces.  Hot 
house  variety  needs  no  peeling. 
Place  in  baking  dish  in  layers,  sprink- 
ling sugar  between  layers.  Add  2 
tablespoons  water,  1  tablespoon  Cris- 
co, and  a  few  thin  strips  orange 
peel,  place  in  moderate  oven,  cover 
and  bake  1  hour.  Dissolve  gelatine 
in  orange  juice  and  when  rhubarb  is 
cooked  remove  it  from  oven  and  add 
this  mixture  to  it.  Let  it  get  cold. 
When  ready  to  serve  fill  shells  with 
rhubarb  mixture,  heap  with  whipped 
cream  and  decorate  with  crystallized 
orange  peel. 


June  26 

*Curried  Chicken 
New  Green  Peas      Young  Carrots 

Macedoine  Salad 
Boiled  Custard  with  Snow  Eggs 
Cofee 
*Currted  Chicken — Clean  and  dress  a 
3-pound  chicken  and  cut  in  pieces 
for  serving.  Put  >^  cup  Crisco  in  a 
hot  frying  pan,  add  chicken,  and 
cook  10  minutes,  tightly  covered. 
Then  add  liver  and  gizzard,  and  con- 
tinue cooking  for  10  minutes  longer. 
Cut  2  medium-sized  onions  in  thin 
slices,  and  add  to  chicken  with  2 
teaspoons  salt  and  1  tablespoon 
curry  powder.  Add  sufficient  boil- 
ing water  to  cover,  and  simmer 
until  chicken  is  tender.  Remove 
chicken,  strain  liquor,  and  thicken 
it  with  a  roux  of  flour  and  water. 
Make  border  of  boiled  rice  around 
platter  or  serving  dish,  arrange 
chicken  in  center,  and  pour  curry 
sauce  over  it. 

June  27 

Boiled  Salmon,  Egg  Sauce 

Boiled  Potatoes  Peas 

Cucumber  Salad 

*  Almond  Pudding       Meringues 

Coffee 

*Almond    Pudding — Beat    separately 

yolks  of  2  eggs  and  whites  of  3,  and 

mix  to  a  cream   with  4  tablespoons 

ground  almonds,  4  tablespoons  sugar, 

and  4  tablespoons  Crisco.     Mix  in  a 

wineglass   of  sherry,    and    pour   into 

a    Criscoed    mold    ornamented    with 

nuts.     Bake  it,  and  serve  hot. 

June  28 

Cream  of  Lettuce  Soup        Bread  Sticks 

*  Halibut  Ramekins 

Baked  Potatoes      Asparagus. 

Ginger  Ice  Cream       Lady  Fingers 

Coffee 

*  Halibut     Ramekins — Flake     rather 

finely  13^  pounds  cooked  halibut.  See 

that  it  is  free  from  bones  and  skin. 

Have   ready   1    pint   seasoned    white 

sauce.     Crisco  few   fireproof   dishes. 


192 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Mix  halibut  with  sauce,  season 
with  salt  and  pepper,  then  fill  dishes 
with  it,  smooth  over  surface  with 
wetted  knife,  and  cover  with  thin 
layer  white  sauce.  Sprinkle  top  with 
mixture  of  breadcrumbs  and  grated 
cheese, and  place  a  few  tiny  bitsCrisco 
here  and  there  on  surface.  Bake  in 
fairly  hot  oven  25  minutes,  so  as 
to  get  it  thoroughly  heated  and  sur- 
face browned.    Dish  up  and  serve  hot. 

June  29 

*Bee}  Croquettes,  Brown  Sauce 

Masked  Potatoes        Beets 

Fruit  Salad 

Cheese         Crackers 

Coffee 

*Beef  Croquettes — Melt  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  stir  in  1  tablespoon  flour, 
gradually  add  ^  pint  milk,  stir  till 
it  boils  4  minutes,  add  salt  and  pepper 
totaste;>^  pound  cold  cooked  chopped 
beef  and  4  tablespoons  breadcrumbs. 
Turn  out  on  plate  to  cool.  Divide 
into  8  pieces,  flour  them  and  make 
into  neat  croquettes.  Egg  and  bread- 
crumb them.  Fry  till  brown  in  hot 
Crisco.  Drain  and  serve  hot  with 
brown  sauce. 

June  30 

*Breaded  Veal  Cutlets 

Potatoes 

Egg  Plant 

Cress,   Whipped  Cream  Dressing 

Cottage  Pudding,  Strawberry  Sauce 

Coffee 

*Breaded  Veal  Cutlets — \}4.  pounds 
fillet  or  neck  of  veal,  Crisco  for  fry- 
ing, yi  teaspoon  chopped  parsley,  % 
teaspoon  grated  lemon  rind,  salt  and 
pepper,  egg  and  breadcrumbs. 

Cut  meat  into  thin  slices,  which 
afterwards  trim  into  neat  fillets. 
Beat  egg,  mix  with  it  parsley,  lemon 
rind,  good  seasoning  of  salt  and 
pepper.  Brush  cutlets  over  with  this 
preparation,  coat  them  carefully  with 
breadcrumbs,  fry  quickly  and  lightly 
in  hot  Crisco.  Serve  with  either 
tomato  or  piquante  sauce,  or,  when 


gravy  is  preferred,  brown  little  flour 
in  Crisco  in  frying  pan,  add  little  salt 
and  pepper,  pour  \n  ]4o{  2i  pint  of  hot 
water,  boil  up,  and  strain. 

July  1 

Boned  Chicken       Stuffed  Pepper  Salad 

Sliced  Tomatoes 

White  and  Brown  Bread 

*Ground  Rice  Pudding 

Coffee  Jelly 

fruit 

*Ground  Rice  Pudding — ^2  cup  ground 
rice,  3  cups  milk,  3  eggs,  4  tablespoons 
sugar,  rind  ^2  lemon,  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  }4  cup  Sultana  raisins,  and 
brown    breadcrumbs. 

Boil  milk  slowly,  sprinkle  in  ground 
rice,  boil  6  minutes.  Remove  add 
sugar  and  Crisco.  Mix  well,  cool  a 
little,  add  eggs  well  beaten,  stir  and 
flavor  with  grated  lemon  rind.  Crisco 
plain  mold,  dust  with  toasted  bread- 
crumbs. Pour  in  pudding.  Bake  1 
hour  in  moderate  oven.  Serve  with 
following  sauce:  1  small  lemon,  1  cup 
water,  1  teaspoon  cornstarch,  1  table- 
spoon sugar,  and  few  drops  red  color. 
Put  cornstarch  into  pan  with  lemon 
juice,  add  other  ingredients  and  bring 
to  boil. 

July  2 

Spanish  Veal  Balls 

Summer  Squash 

Buttered  Beets 

Lettuce  and  Peppergrass  Salad 

*Snow  Souffle 

Iced  Coffee 

*Snow  Souffle — Put  2  tablespoons 
Crisco  and  4  tablespoons  potato 
flour  in  pan,  stir  well  together,  add 
>2  cup  milk,  pinch  salt,  and  stir  till 
boiling.  Remove  from  fire,  add  4 
tablespoons  sugar,  yolks  3  eggs  1  by 
1,  }4  teaspoon  orange  flower  water, 
and  fold  in  stiflly  beaten  whites  of 
eggs.  Pour  into  Criscoed  souffle  mold, 
put  greased  paper  round.  Bake  for 
20  minutes  in  moderate  oven.  Serve 
at  once. 


193 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Julys 

Roast  Lamb 

New  Potatoes 

Green  Peas  *  Summer  Squash 

Watercress  and  Cucumber  Salad 

Coffee  Ice  Cream 

Lady  Fingers 

*Summer  Squash — Cut  summer 
squashes  into  small  pieces  and  boil 
till  tender  in  salted  water.  Put  into 
a  clean  towel  and  wring  out  all 
water.  Put  squashes  into  saucepan 
and  add  to  each  cup  of  them,  2  table- 
spoons cream  and  yi  tablespoon 
Crisco.  Heat  thoroughly  before  send- 
ing to  table. 


July  4 

Fruit  Cocktail 

Carrot  Soup  Radishes 

Stuffed  Shoulder  of  Veal,  Roasted 

Potato  Souffle        Green  Corn 

Molded  Spinach,  French  Dressing 

Washington  Ice  Cream 

*Flag  Cake 

Coffee 

*Flag  Cake — J\  cup  sugar,  }4  cup 
Crisco,  ^  cup  milk,  1^^  cups  flour,  2 
teaspoons  baking  powder,  }4  tea- 
spoon salt,  whites  of  4  eggs,  and  1 
teaspoon  vanilla.  Cream  Crisco 
and  sugar  together,  add  flour,  salt, 
baking  powder,  milk,  vanilla  and 
whites  of  eggs  beaten  to  a  stiff  froth. 
Mix  carefully,  turn  into  Criscoed 
and  floured  tin  and  bake  in  moder- 
ate oven  for  %  of  an  hour.  Decor- 
ate with  frosting  and  tiny  flags. 

Julys 

Iced  Pimiento  Consomme 
Small   Tenderloins  of  Beef 
Molded  Potatoes  *Corn  Cakes 

Orange, Grapefruit  and  Romaine  Salad 
Cup  Custards 
Coffee 
*Corn  Cakes — Make  a  custard  from 
2  eggs  well  beaten,  yi  cup  milk,  ^i 
tablespoon  Crisco,  and  }4  table- 
spoon sugar;  beat  into  this  ^^  of 
cup  of  canned  corn.  Sift  together 
twice,  pi  cup  of  flour,  1  tablespoon 


baking  powder,  and  yi  teaspoon  salt; 
beat  into  other  mixture,  and  drop 
in  Criscoed  muffin  rings  by  the  table- 
spoon; set  in  a  Criscoed  dripping 
pan,  and  bake  in  a  moderate  oven 
until  done. 

July  6 

Clam  Bisque 
Lamb  Chops  Escalloped  Corn 

Creamed  Sweet  Potatoes 
German  Salad  *Cheese  Drops 

Strawberry  Bavarian  Cream 
Coffee 

*Cheese  Drops — Add  to  3>^  table- 
spoons flour,  2  tablespoons  melted 
Crisco,  and  blend  together  until 
smooth.  Remove  from  fire,  add  4 
tablespoons  grated  cheese,  %  tea- 
spoon salt,  and  a  dash  of  red  pepper. 
Fold  in  stiffly  beaten  whites  of  3 
eggs,  and  drop  from  end  of  spoon  on  a 
Criscoed  baking  sheet  about  1  inch 
apart,  and  bake  from  12  to  14  min- 
utes in  a  moderate  oven.  Serve  hot 
in  folded  napkin  with  salad   course. 

July? 

Beef  Broth   with   Fermicelli 
*Baked  Bluefish 

Cucumbers,  French  Dressing 
Mashed  Potatoes 
Buttered  Bermuda  Onions 
Heavenly  Hash 
Coffee 
*Baked    Bluefish — Select     nice    large 
bluefish,    clean,    and    prepare    it    for 
baking.      Wash    it    in    salted    water, 
and  after  drying  it  thoroughly,  stuff 
with  bread  stuffing,  and  sew  up  open- 
ing and  rub  fish   all  over  with  salt. 
Then,    having    put    small    pieces    of 
Crisco  over,  place  in  pan  with  enough 
water  to  cover  bottom,  and  bake  in 
hot  oven  45  or  50  minutes.     After  it 
begins  to  bake,  sprinkle  with  salt  and 
pepper.      Baste   it   often   with   liquid 
in    pan    and    a   little    melted    Crisco. 
When  it  is  cooked  and  a  nice  color, 
remove   carefully  to  hot   plate.      Do 
not    break    it.      Serve    with    brown 
sauce  poured  round  fish  as  garnish, 
or  serve  it  in  a  separate  dish. 


194 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Julys 

Iced  Bouillon 
Broiled  Chicken 
Mashed  Potatoes  New  Peas 

Tomato  Mayonnaise 
*Red  Raspberry  Shortcake,  Hot 
Alarshmallozv  Sauce 
Coffee 
*Red    Raspberry    Shortcake — 4    cups 
sifted    flour,    3    tablespoons    baking 
powder,    1    teaspoon    salt,    2    table- 
spoons Crisco,  milk,  and  2  quarts  red 
raspberries.     Sift  baking  powder  and 
salt  with   flour,  rub  in   Crisco;  then 
with  fork  stir  in  lightly  and  quickly 
suflicient  milk  to  make  soft  dough— 
too  soft  to  roll.    Turn  it  into  Criscoed 
tin,  and  bake  in  hot  oven  30  minutes. 
Unmold,    and    leaving    it    inverted, 
cut  circle  around  top  within  1  inch  of 
edge;  lift  off  circle  of  crust,  and  with 
fork    pick    out    crumb    from    center, 
leaving  about  ^  of  an  inch  of  biscuit 
around    sides.      Spread    inside    cake 
with   butter,   fill  with   crushed   rasp- 
berries, which  have  been  standing  j4 
hour    or    more    mixed    with    enough 
sugar   to   sweeten    them.      Turn    off 
juice  from  berries  before  filling  cake. 
Replace    circle    of   crust,    and    serve 
with    following    sauce:        j4    pound 
marshmallows,  }4  cup  confectioners' 
sugar,  and  5^  cup  boiling  water.    Cut 
marshmallows  in  pieces  and  melt  in 
double     boiler.       Dissolve     sugar    in 
boiling  water,  add  to  marshmallows, 
and    stir    until    blended.     Serve    hot 
with  shortcake. 

July  9 

Sardines  and  Lemon 

Olives  Radishes 

Cold  Roast  of  Lamb,  Mint  Sauce 

Creamed  Potatoes  Pfas 

Endive  and  Cheese  Salad 

*Cherry  Souffle 

Iced  Tea 

*Cherry  Souffle — 4   tablespoons   flour, 

2   tablespoons   Crisco,    }4    cup    milk, 

1  teaspoon  vanilla,  3  whole  eggs  and 

1    additional    white,    4    tablespoons 

sugar,    and    4    tablespoons    chopped 

preserved  cherries. 


Put  Crisco  and  flour  in  saucepan, 
mix  over  fire,  add  milk,  stir  till  it  boils 
and  becomes  thick;  remove  from  fire 
to  cool  10  minutes,  add  sugar,  yolks 
eggs,  1  by  1  stirring  each  thoroughly, 
whites  stiffly  beaten  up,  then  add 
chopped  cherries.  Pour  all  into 
Criscoed  souffle  mold.  Put  into 
saucepan  with  }4  an  inch  of  boiling 
water.  Put  lid  on  saucepan  ami 
steam  gently  K  hour.  Turn  out,  send 
to  table  with  jam  sauce  round. 


July  10 

Clam  Broth 
*Chicken  Croquettes  Peas 

Buttered  Rolls 
Mayonnaise  of  Lettuce  and  Tomatoes 
Tutti  frutti  Ice  Cream 
Macaroons 
Coffee 
*Chicken   Croquettes— 2    cups    cooked 
chicken,    ^    teaspoon    salt,    }i    tea- 
spoon celery  salt,   1  teaspoon  lemon 
juice,   }4   teaspoon   onion  juice,   and 
1   cup  white  sauce. 

Mix  ingredients  in  order  given. 
Cool  mixture,  shape,  crumb  and  fry 
in  hot  Crisco.  The  white  sauce  is 
made  as  follows:  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  4  tablespoons  flour,  1  cup 
milk  (heated),  salt  and  pepper  to 
taste.  Melt  Crisco,  add  flour,  then 
add  milk  gradually.  Cook  over  fire 
until  smooth  and  thick.  Add  season- 
ing. 

July  11 

Roast  Beef        Yorkshire  Pudding 

Potato  Croquettes 

String  Beans    ■ 

Lettuce,  French  Dressing 

*Fruit  Pancakes 

Coffee 

*Fruit  Pancakes — 2  cups  flour,  2  cups 

milk,   2   tablespoons   Crisco,   2   eggs, 

nutmeg  and  salt  to  taste.     Put  flour 

into  basin  with  salt,  grated  nutmeg, 

eggs,  pour  milk  in  by  degrees,  stirring 

smoothly;  beat  it  well  in  order  to  let 

the  air  in,  and  then  let  it  stand  for  K 

an  hour.     This  allows  starch  grains 


195 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


in  flour  to  swell,  and  so  batter  is 
lighter.  When  ready  to  fry,  warm 
Crisco  and  pour  in,  stirring  at  same 
time.  Make  some  Crisco  hot  in  a 
small  saucepan,  ladle  some  into  a 
frying  pan,-  when  very  hot,  pour 
back  into  saucepan,  but  do  not  drain 
it,  then  ladle  sufficient  batter  in  to 
cover  the  bottom  of  pan,  shake  it 
gently  over  rather  a  sharp  fire,  and, 
when  nicely  browned,  toss  it  over  and 
brown  other  side,  turn  on  to  a  wire 
or  sieve,  sprinkle  with  sugar  and  ripe 
blackberries.  Roll  it  up,  and  keep  it 
warm  while  finishing  remainder  of 
batter.  Dish  them  up  on  platter, 
each  row  crossways  to  prevent  under 
ones  from  becoming  sodden.  Sprinkle 
sugar  over  top  and  serve. 

July  12 

Cottage  Pie 

New  Stringless  Beans 

Olive  Salad        Cheese  Beignets 

*  Apricot  Pudding 

Iced  Cofee 
*Apricot  Pudding — Put  1  pint  milk 
into  saucepan,  add  two  tablespoons 
Crisco,  and  bring  to  boiling  point. 
Mix  }4  cup  cornstarch  with  K  cup 
milk  and  stir  slowly  into  boiling  milk, 
add  yi  teaspoon  salt.  Heat  1  cup 
apricot  jam,  and  strain  off  juice.  Stir 
the  pieces  of  apricot  into  cornstarch 
and  cook  for  5  minutes.  Sprinkle  1 
tablespoon  chopped  pistachio  nuts 
into  wet  mold  and  pour  in  hot  mix- 
ture. Turn  out  when  cold  and  sur- 
round with  apricot  juice. 

July  13 

Cream  of  Peanut  Soup 
*Feal  Chops 
Mashed  Potatoes        String  Beans 
Onion  Salad 
Meringues  filled  with  Custard 
Coffee 
*Veal  Chops — Trim    neatly   8   chops 
and  put  into  frying  pan  with  4  table- 
spoons Crisco,  and  fry  over  quick  fire 
a  nice  brown  color.    As  the  meat  will 
afterwards  be  cooked  again,  the  fry- 
ing  process  should   be  done   quickly 


without  actually  cooking  the  chops. 
Place  them  between  2  boards,  put 
weight  not  too  heavy  over  top,  and 
keep  them  until  cold.  Strain  Crisco, 
and  keep  for  further  use.  Cut  }/i  cup 
pork  and  }4  cup  beef  marrow  into 
small  pieces,  pound  in  mortar; 
when  fine,  add  1  tablespoon  anchovy 
paste,  1  teaspoon  powdered  savory 
herbs,  1  yolk  egg,  and  piece  of  Crisco 
about  size  of  nutmeg.  Pound  thor- 
oughly until  smooth,  season  with 
pepper  and  salt,  rub  through  sieve, 
and  cover  side  of  each  chop  thickly 
with  this.  Put  them  on  Criscoed 
baking  sheet,  cover  with  few  fried 
breadcrumbs,  sprinkle  with  melted 
Crisco  and  place  in  hot  oven  for  10 
minutes.  Dish  up  chops  in  circle  on 
hot  dish,  and  serve. 

July  14 

Steak,  a  la  Parmesan       Corn  Pudding 
Mashed  Potatoes 
Lettuce,  French  Dressing 
*Cheese  Balls 
Peach  Ice  Cream 
Coffee 
*Cheese  Balls — ^  cup   breadcrumbs, 
I  teaspoon  Crisco,  }4  teaspoon  must- 
ard,   1   cup  grated   cheese,  1  egg,  }4 
teaspoon  salt,  and  a   few   grains  red 
pepper.  .  Rub  Crisco  into  crumbs  and 
cheese,  add  seasonings   and   egg  well 
beaten.     Shape  in  small  balls  and  fry 
in  hot  Crisco.     Drain  and  serve  hot. 

July  15 

Stuffed  Shoulder  of  Veal,  Braised 

Buttered  Beets     Potato  Roses 

Onion  and  Tomato  Salad 

Rhubarb  Dumplings 

*Mocha  Cake 

Coffee 

*Mocha  Cake — Sift  6  cups  flour  with 
1  teaspoon  baking  powder  into  a 
basin,  add  1  teaspoon  each  of  pow- 
dered cinnamon,  nutmeg,  and  cloves, 
1  cup  brown  sugar,  ^  teaspoonful 
salt,  and  1  cup  Crisco;  rub  well  to- 
gether, add  yi  a  cup  golden  syrup, 
1  cup  strong  cold  coffee,  2  well 
beaten  eggs,  I  cup  currants  and  1  cup 


196 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


sultana  raisins,  mix  well  together. 
Pour  into  Criscoed  and  papered  tin 
and  bake  in  moderate  oven  2  hours. 

July  16 

Tomato  Soup 
Fried  Chicken      Waffles      Pea  Souffles 
Creamed  White  Potatoes    BeanSalad 
*Snow  Balls  Coffee 

*Snow  Balls — 1  cup  sugar,  ^3  cup 
milk,  yi  cup  Crisco,  2>^  cups  flour, 
3)4  teaspoons  baking  powder,  and 
whites  of  4  eggs.  Cream  Crisco,  add 
sugar  gradually,  milk,  and  flour 
sifted  with  baking  powder;  add  whites 
of  eggs  beaten  stiff".  Steam  35  minutes 
in  Criscoed  cups;  serve  with  stewed 
or  preserved  fruit. 

July  17 

Iced  Currants 

*Blanquette  of  Veal 

Fried  Artichokes         Duchesse  Potatoes 

Cauliflower  and  Red  Pepper  Salad 

Macaroon  Trifle  Coffee 
*Blanquette  of  Veal — 2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  2  pounds  fillet  of  veal,  yi 
cup  cream,  4  tablespoons  flour,  1 
large  onion,  1  carrot,  seasoning,  12 
preserved  mushrooms,  and  12  whole 
peppers.  Cut  veal  into  square  pieces, 
put  them  into  stewpan  with  enough 
cold  water  to  cover,  bring  it  to  boil, 
and  skim  well;  add  salt  to  taste, 
onion  cut  in  quarters,  carrot,  whole 
peppers;  cook  gently  1  hour.  Take 
up  meat,  strain  stock,  and  measure 
off  1  pint.  Melt  Crisco  in  stewpan, 
stir  in  flour,  add  stock;  boil  and  skim; 
cook  for  a  few  minutes.  Add  mush- 
rooms, cut  in  slices,  and  cream;  put 
in  pieces  of  veal;  make  hot,  but  do 
not  boil  again;  season  nicely,  dish  up, 
sprinkle  little  chopped  parsley  over, 
and    serve. 

July  18 

Onion  Soup 

Fricasseed  Tripe 

Baked  Potatoes  Stringless  Beans 

Tomatoes  Stuffed  with  Pineapple 

Bisque  Ice  Cream  Coffee 

*Fricasseed  Tripe — Cut    2    pounds  of 

tripe  into  narrow  strips,  add  ^  cup 


of  water,  2  cups  milk,  season  with 
salt  and  pepper,  add  >^  cup  Crisco 
mixed  with  2  tablespoons  flour; 
simmer  for  30  minutes  and  serve 
hot.  A  little  chopped  parsley  is  an 
improvement. 

July  19 

Cream  of  Asparagus  Soup 

*Lamb  Fricassee  with  Dumplings 

Mint  Jelly    Green  Peas 

Romaine  Salad 

Cheese 

Toasted  Crackers 

Watermelon 

Coffee 

*Lamh    Fricassee    with    Dumplings — 

Cut   up   and   dice   enough   cold   lamb 

to  make   1   quart.      Season  with  salt 

and  white  pepper,  put  into  Criscoed 

baking  dish  and  pour  over  following 

sauce:      Blend   2   tablespoons   Crisco 

with   2   tablespoons    flour,   and   cook 

until  brown.     Now  add  2  cups  water 

and   when  it   boils   season  with   salt, 

pepper,  onion  juice  to  taste  and  pour 

over    meat.       Cover     and     bake    in 

moderate  oven  20  minutes. 

To  make  the  dumplings,  sift  to- 
gether 2  cups  flour,  }4  teaspoon  salt, 
X  teaspoon  sugar,  and  2  teaspoons 
baking  powder.  Add  1  tablespoon 
Crisco  and  rub  in  with  tips  of  fingers, 
then  add  sufficient  milk  to  make  soft 
dough.  Roll  out  and  cut  into  small 
biscuits.  Place  on  top  of  lamb  and 
bake  in  hot  oven  for  12  minutes. 
Serve  hot. 

July  20 

Roast  Beeps  Heart 
Boiled  New  Potatoes 
Cauliflower  au  Gratin 
Baked  Bean  Salad 
*Cheese  Aigrettes 
Apricot  Meringue  Pie 
Coffee 
*Cheese     Aigrettes — Bring     2     table- 
spoons Crisco  and   }4  cup  water  to 
boiling  point,  then  add  }4  cup  flour 
and    stir    until    mixture   leaves    sides 
of  pan.     Cool,   but  do  not   allow  to 
become    cold,    then    add     2    eggs,    1 


197 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


by  1,  4  tablespoons  grated  cheese, 
salt,  pepper,  and  paprika  to  taste 
and  beat  well.  Allow  to  stand  in 
cool  place  30  minutes.  Drop  by 
teaspoons  into  hot  Crisco  and  fry  a 
golden  brown.  Drain  and  sprinkle 
with  grated  cheese.  Serve  hot.  The 
Crisco  should  not  be  too  hot  or  the 
cheese  will  burn. 


July  21 


Vefietarian 


Strawberry  Cocktails 
Macaroni  Cutlets,  Cheese  Sauce 

*Popovers 
Tomato  Mayonnaise 

Pimiento  Sandwiches 
Frozen  Banana  Whip 
Coffee 

*Pop  Overs — Beat  up  3  eggs  until 
light;  add  1  cup  milk  and  1  teaspoon 
melted  Crisco.  Pour  this  gradually 
into  1  cup  flour  and  >^  teaspoon  salt, 
beating  all  the  time  until  smooth. 
Crisco  iron  gem  pans,  put  them  in  the 
oven,  and  when  hot,  take  them  out 
and  fill  them  half  full  of  this  batter. 
Put  them  back  in  the  oven  and  bake 
for  45  minutes.  They  should  be  at 
least  4  times  their  original  bulk.  If 
they  fall,  they  are  not  thoroughly 
done.     The  oven  should  be  hot. 

July  22 

*  Pilau,  a  la  Turque 

Peppers  Stuffed  with  Green  Corn 

Huntington  Salad 

Cheese  Rolls 

Baked  Custard 

Coffee 

*  Pilau,  a  la  Turque — Put  \}4  cups  of 
stock,  with  1  cup  stewed  and  strained 
tomato,  over  fire.  When  boiling 
add  1  cup  well-washed  or  blanched 
rice  and  }4  teaspoon  salt;  stir  lightly 
with  fork,  occasionally,  until  liquor  is 
absorbed.  Then  add  }i  cup  Crisco, 
season  with  salt  and  pepper,  and 
cook  over  hot  water  until  tender; 
remove  coyer,  and  stir  with  fork 
before  serving. 


July  23 

Vegetable  Soup 

Fried  Fish 

Baked  Shoulder  of  Mutton 

Onion  Puree 

Chipped  Potatoes 

Fruit  Jelly 

Toasted  Cheese  Fingers 

Coffee 

*Fried  Fish — Marinade  4  halibut 
steaks  for  1  hour;  drain,  dip  in 
salted  flour,  then  in  beaten  egg, 
lastly  in  fine  salted  and  peppered 
crumbs.  Leave  on  ice  for  1  hour, 
and  fry  in  hot  Crisco. 

July  24 

Lamb  Potpie 
Summer  Squash 

Mashed  Potatoes 
Dressed  Cucumbers 
Raspberry  Float 

*Cushion  Cake 
Iced  Coffee 

*Cushion  Cake — Cream  1  cup  Crisco 
with  }4  cup  sugar,  add  2  well  beaten 
eggs,  and  }4  cup  milk.  Sift  2  cups 
flour,  2  teaspoons  baking  powder, 
and  }^  teaspoon  salt,  and  add  to 
Crisco  mixture,  with  1  teaspoon 
vanilla  extract.  Divide  into  2  parts, 
add  to  1  part  2  tablespoons  molasses, 
1  cup  se^ed  raisins,  }4  teaspoon 
cloves,  1  teaspoon  cinnamon,  and  ^ 
teaspoon  grated  nutmeg.  Bake  in 
Criscoed  and  floured  cake  tin  for  20 
minutes.  Take  out  of  oven,  spread 
white  part  on  top,  return  to  oven  and 
bake  until  done. 


July  25 

*Tournedos  of  Lamb      Rissole  Potatoes 

Carrots  Peas 

Grape  and  Pimiento  Salad 

Frozen  Cheese 

Toasted  Crackers 

Iced  Coffee 

*Tournedos  of  Lamb — Six  lamb  chops 
cut  2  inches  thick,  will  be  required. 
Remove  bone  and  fat  and  with 
skewers  arrange  in  6  circular  pieces. 


198 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Around  each  wrap  a  thin  strip  of 
bacon,  fastening  in  place  with  wooden 
skewers.  Sprinkle  with  salt  and  pep- 
per, place  on  well  Criscoed  broiler, 
and  broil  over  clear  fire  15  minutes. 
Remove  to  hot  platter,  garnish  with 
rissole  potatoes,  and  pass  mint  jelly 
with  them.  The  potatoes  are  done 
in  this  way:  Peel  and  wash  8  Ber- 
muda potatoes  of  uniform  size,  put 
in  ice  water  for  15  minutes,  dry  in  a 
towel,  and  fry  until  delicate  brown 
in  hot  Crisco.  Drain  on  paper,  then 
bake  until  soft.  Remove  to  serving 
platter,  and  pour  around  1  cup  of 
rich  white  or  cream  sauce  or  1  cup  of 
heavy  cream  scalded  and  seasoned. 


Vegetarian 


July  26 


Cream  of  Green  Peas 
Bean  Loaf  with  Rice 
Stewed  Corn 
Tomato  and  Lettuce  Salad 
*  Peach  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Peach  Pudding — Fill   Criscoed   bak- 
ing  dish    full    of   peaches    and    pour 
over  top  a  batter  made  of  1   table- 
spoon  Crisco,    yi   cup   sugar,    1    cup 
flour,     1     teaspoon    baking    powder, 
1  well  beaten  egg,  }A  teaspoon  salt, 
and  1   cup  milk.     Bake  in  moderate 
oven  30  minutes.     Serve  with  cream. 

July  27 

Anchovy   and  Pimiento  Cat^apes 

Halibut  Baked,   a  la  Creole 

French  Fried  Potatoes 

Hot  Slaw 

*French  Pancakes 

Coffee 

*French      Pancakes — 4      tablespoons 

sugar,  4  tablespoons  Crisco,   }4  cup 

flour,   2    eggs,    }4   tablespoon   lemon 

extract,  and  1  cup  milk.    Heat  Crisco 

and  mix  other  ingredients  gradually 

to  them,   bake  in  six  small   criscoed 

plates   for   5    minutes.      When   done, 

put    jam     between    every    alternate 

one,  and  serve  high  on  a  dish. 


July  28 

Puree  of  Fruit 
Steak  with  Fresh  Mushrooms 
String  Beans  Riced  Potatoes 

Lettuce  and  Watercress  Salad 
*Cherry  Blanc-mange 
Coffee 
*Cherry  Blanc-mange — Put  1  quart  of 
milk  into  a  saucepan,  add  1  table- 
spoon Crisco.  Mix  1  cup  cornstarch 
smoothly  with  }4  cup  cold  milk; 
when  the  milk  boils  stir  in  cornstarch 
and  stir  for  10  minutes,  then  add  2 
tablespoons  sugar  and  1  teaspoon 
vanilla.  Stew  2  cups  cherries  until 
tender  in  l4  cup  water,  add  2  table- 
spoons sugar.  Rinse  out  a  mold 
with  cold  water,  arrange  a  few 
cherries  in  the  bottom,  then  put  in 
some  blanc-mange,  then  rest  of 
cherries  mixed  with  cornstarch.  Turn 
out  when  firm.     Serve  with  milk. 

July  29 

Iced  Tomato  Bouillon 
*Swiss  Steak  Mashed  Potato 

Egg  Plant  Fritters 
Lettuce  Salad,  Chiffonade  Dressing 
Strawberry  Parfait 
Coffee 
*Swiss     Steak — 1     pound     steak,     I 
cup  flour,  salt  and  pepper,  4  skinned 
tomatoes,  1  sliced  onion,  and  water. 
Have  steak  cut  2  inches  thick,  and 
pound  into  it  the  flour.     Put  steak 
into    a    skillet,    with    3    tablespoons 
Crisco    and    brown    on    both    sides. 
Then  cover  with  water,  adding  sliced 
onion,    tomatoes    sliced     and     cover 
closely  and  let  simmer  for  3   hours. 
Just  before  steak  is  done  add  salt  and 
pepper   to   taste.      When    done,    the 
gravy  is  already  made  and  is  delicious. 

July  30 

Clear  Soup 

*  Planked  Chicken 

Potato  Croquettes      Asparagus  Tips 

Boiled  Rice         Pineapple  Salad 

Vanilla  Ice  Cream       Strawberry  Sauce 

Coffee 
*  Planked  Chicken — 2  spring  chickens, 
1    cup   boiled   rice,    >^   pound   mush- 
rooms, and  1  glass  guava  jelly.    Stew 


199 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


mushrooms;  put  chicken  either  in 
oven  or  under  broiler,  bone  side  to 
hottest  part  of  fire.  Heat  and  Crisco 
a  plank;  put  chicken  on,  bone  side 
down;  sprinkle  with  melted  Crisco, 
dust  with  salt  and  pepper  and  broil 
on  board  under  gas  for  }4  an  hour. 
Garnish  with  rice;  pour  over  mush- 
rooms. Place  at  corners  small  bread 
patties,  holding  the  guava  jelly. 

July  31 

*Baked  Beans 

Finger  Rolls 

Beet  and  Potato  Salad 

Lemon  Jelly,  Whipped  Cream 

Cafe  Parjait 
*Baked  Beans — Wash  2  quarts 
small  white  beans,  put  them  in  a 
saucepan,  cover  with  cold  water; 
as  soon  as  they  come  to  a  boil,  drain; 
put  them  in  a  fireproof  baking  dish, 
add  4  tablespoons  Crisco,  1  chopped 
onion,  salt  and  pepper  to  taste  and 
}4  teaspoon  mustard,  fill  dish  with 
boiling  water,  cover  tight,  and  bake 
from  5  to  6  hours;  add  more  water 
as  required  to  keep  from  getting  dry. 
They  can  be  warmed  over  as  needed. 


of 


August  1 

Brown  Fricassee  of  Kidneys 
Summer  Squash       New  Cabbage  Salad 

^Blueberry  Pie  Cofee 

*Blueberry  Pie — Line  a  deep  per- 
forated tin  with  Crisco  Plain  Pastry; 
brush  over  with  water  or  white  of 
egg.  Fill  with  floured  blueberries; 
add  sugar,  Crisco,  salt  and  vinegar. 
Allow  1  cup  sugar  to  3  cups  berries, 
1  tablespoon  Crisco,  yi  teaspoon 
salt,  and  }4  teaspoon  vinegar.  Cover 
with  crust  and  bake. 

August  2 

*Beef  Olives 
Braised  Lettuce        Stuffed  Potatoes 

Beet  Salad      Cheese  Relish 
Red  Currant  Cream       Lady  Fingers 
Coffee 
*Beef  Olives — Cut  2  pounds  of  steak 
into    pieces   4^    inches    long    and    2 
inches    wide.       Mix    together    in     a 
basin  3  tablespoons  breadcrumbs,   1 


chopped  onion,  4  tablespoons  Crisco, 

1  tablespoon  chopped  parsley,  salt, 
pepper,  and  paprika  to  taste  and  1 
well  beaten  egg.  Spread  a  little  of 
this  mixture  on  each  piece  of  meat, 
roll  up  and  tie  with  fine  string.     Melt 

2  tablespoons  Crisco  in  a  pan,  brown 
pieces  of  meat  in  it;  stir  in  1  table- 
spoon flour,  gradually  add  2  cups 
water,  bring  to  boiling  point  and 
cook  slowly  \}4  hours.  Remove 
string  and  dish  in  a  circle,  season 
the  gravy  and  strain  over  the  meat. 

August  3 

Cream  of  Corn  Soup 
*Stuffed  Flank  Steak 
Mashed  Potato  Shelled  Beans 

Onion  and  Mint  Salad 
Ivory  Cream  Coffee 

*Stuffed  Flank  Steak— Buy  a  flank 
steak.  Fry  2  tablespoons  chopped 
onion  in-  a  ^  cup  Crisco.  Add  }4 
cup  soft,  stale  breadcrumbs,  ^  tea- 
spoon mixed  herbs,  salt  and  pepper 
to  taste.  Spread  over  steak,  roll 
and  tie.  Brown  in  3  tablespoons 
Crisco,  and  remove  to  casserole  or 
covered  dish.  To  the  Crisco  in  pan 
add  an  equal  quantity  of  flour,  and 
brown,  then  add  1  cup  stock  or  boil- 
ing water,  and  1  cjip  strained  to- 
mato, season  with  salt  and  pepper, 
pour  over  the  roll,  cover  dish,  and 
cook  slowly  until  meat  is  tender.  If 
cooked  in  casserole  it  may  be  served 
in  same  dish. 

August  4 

Fried  Soft  Shell  Crabs,  Sauce  Tartare 
Hashed  Browned  Potatoes 
Pepper  and  Cucumber  Salad 
Cheese  Fingers 
*  Apricot  Omelet      Coffee 
*  Apricot  Omelet — Cut  6  preserved  ap- 
ricots into   dice,    and   heat    up   in   a 
little  fruit  juice.     Beat  up  5  eggs,  add 
pinch  of  salt  and  1  tablespoon  sugar. 
Melt  in  an  omelet  pan  or  frying  pan 
2  tablespoons  Crisco,  when  hot  pour 
in   beaten   eggs   and   stir   over  quick 
fire  till   they   commence  to  thicken, 
put   in   the    prepared    apricots,   then 
shape  quickly  into  an  oval  form  by 

200 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


folding  the  ends.  Allow  the  omelet  to 
acquire  a  golden  brown  by  putting 
it  in  the  oven,  turn  out  on  to  a  hot 
dish,  dredge  with  sug?r  and  serve 
at  once. 

August  5 

*Couniry  Club  Chicken 
Sweet  Potatoes  Green  Corn 

Tomato  Salad  Apple  Whip 
Chocolate  JVafers  Cofee 
*Country  Club  Chicken — Wash  2  broil- 
ers or  quite  young  chickens,  cut  them 
in  halves  or  quarters  if  they  be  large 
enough,  wipe  them  and  dip  each 
piece  in  beaten  egg,  well  seasoned 
with  salt  and  pepper  and  mixed  with 
cream.  Roll  pieces  in  breadcrumbs 
and  place  them  in  Criscoed  pan,  dot 
generously  with  Crisco  and  place  in 
hot  oven  for  15  minutes.  Now 
put  chicken  in  hot  kettle,  cover  and 
let  smother  and  steam  for  30  minutes 
or  until  tender  on  a  slow  fire.  Place 
chicken  on  hot  platter;  add  half  cup 
hot  cream  to  gravy  in  kettle  and 
strain  it  over  chickens. 

August  6 

*Baked  Liver  and  Bacon 

Mashed  Potatoes         Corn  on  Cob 

Lettuce  and  Pineapple  Salad 

Stewed  Pears  Cream 

Hasty  Cake      Cofee 

*Baked  Liver  and  Bacon — Select  liver, 

wash  it  well,  rub  it  with   Crisco,  and 

place   it   in   vinegar  with   1   chopped 

shallot,  a  little  chopped  parsley,  and 

salt  and  pepper  to  suit  taste.     Let  it 

stand     overnight;     roast     it,     adding 

strips  of  bacon.     Baste  it  frequently 

with    the    vinegar    mixture.      When 

done,  make   brown  gravy,  and  serve 

very  hot. 

August  7 

Grilled  Trout    Chicken  Saute 

*Souffled  Squash        Potato  Croquettes 

French  Salad    Fruit  Compote 

Coffee 

*Souffled  Squash — Take  medium-sized 

Hubbard   squash,   remove   seeds   and 

stringy    portion,     and     pare.       Place 

in    steamer    and    cook    over    boiling 


water  for  30  minutes.  Mash  and 
season  with  Crisco,  salt  and  pepper 
to  taste.  To  2  cups  of  the  mashed 
squash,  add  gradually  1  cup  cream, 
when  blended,  yolks  of  2  well  beaten 
eggs,  and  finally  the  stiffly  beaten 
whites  of  the  eggs.  Pour  into  Cris- 
coed souffle  dish  and  bake  in  moder- 
ate oven  till  firm.     Serve  at  once. 

August  8 

Clam  Cocktail 
Roast  Lamb,  Mint  Jelly 

Rice  Fritters  Lima  Beans 

Lettuce  and  Banana  Salad 
*JVindsor  Tartlets 
Iced  Coffee 
*Windsor  Tartlets — Crisco  Plain  Pas- 
try, 2  eggs,  4  tablespoons  Crisco,  4 
tablespoons    sugar,    1>^    tablespoons 
cornstarch,    5    powdered    macaroons, 
18   glace   cherries,    1    piece   of  lemon 
peel,     and     J^     tablespoon     chopped 
almonds. 

Put  Crisco  and  sugar  into  1  basin 
and  be.^t  them  to  a  cream.  Add 
yolks  of  eggs,  1  at  a  time,  and  beat 
each  well  in.  Chop  cherries  and  peel, 
add  them  and  macaroons  to  mixture, 
mix  thoroughly,  add  almonds  and 
cornstarch.  Roll  out  Crisco  Plain 
Pastry  and  line  small  tartlet  tins 
thinly  with  it.  Beat  whites  of  eggs 
to  stiff  froth  and  stir  lightly  into 
mixture.  Fill  each  lined  tin  three 
parts  full.  Bake  them  in  moderate 
oven  until  mixture  is  set  and  brown. 
Dust  with  sugar  and  serve  either  hot 
or  cold.  Place  crossbars  of  pastry 
over  mixture,  if  liked.  Stale  cake- 
crumbs  can  be  used  instead  of  mac- 
aroons. 

August  9 

Casserole  of  Lamb         Rice 
Spiced  Peaches      *Macaroon  Pudding 
After  Dinner  Mints 
Coffee 
*Macaroon  Pudding — Soak     6     mac- 
aroons in  ]4  cup  milk.     Heat  2  cups 
milk  in   double   boiler,   add   2   table- 
spoons cornstarch  moistened  with   1 
well  beaten  egg,  1  teaspoon  Crisco,  }4 
teaspoon  salt,  and  macaroons.     Cook 


201 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


for  20  minutes,  remove  from  fire,  add 
yi  teaspoon  vanilla  extract.  Turn 
into  Criscoed  and  sugared  pudding 
dish,  sprinkle  ^  cup  sugar  on  top, 
and  cover  with  sliced  peaches.  Serve 
cold. 

August  10 

Tomato  Bisque  Croutons 

Potato  Croquettes  Fried  Egg  Plant 

Celery  and  Apple  Salad 
^Chocolate  Pudding 
Cofee 
*Chocolate  Pudding — Crisco  a  mold  or 
basin.  Beat  3  tablespoons  Crisco 
and  2  tablespoons  sugar  to  a  cream, 
then  beat  in  3  yolks  of  eggs.  Dis- 
solve \}4  teacups  grated  chocolate 
smoothly  in  1  cup  milk,  add  it  to 
Crisco  mixture,  with  2  cups  cake- 
crumbs,  1  teaspoon  vanilla,  14  tea- 
spoon salt,  and  whites  of  eggs 
stiffly  beaten.  Fold  the  whites  in 
gently.  Pour  into  prepared  mold, 
cover  with  Criscoed  paper  and  steam 
for  2  hours.  Turn  out  and  serve  with 
white  sauce.  This  mixture  may  be 
placed  in  a  Criscoed  pudding  dish 
and  baked  in  a  moderate  oven. 

August  11 

Fried  Chicken,  a  la  Maryland 
French  Fried  Potatoes     *Stewed  Onions 

Stuffed  Tomato  Salad 
Musk  Melon  with  Ice  Cream  Coffee 
*Stewed  Onions — Peel  onions  and  boil 
in  boiling  salted  water  till  tender. 
When  done,  drain,  and  turn  into 
hot  vegetable  dish.  Melt  2  table- 
spoons of  Crisco  in  saucepan,  then 
stir  in  1  tablespoon  flour,  mix  well, 
add  1  cup  milk  and  stir  till  boiling, 
add  salt  and  pepper  to  taste  and  pour 
over  onions. 

August  12 

Broiled  Ham 

Baked  Potatoes         Green  Corn  Custard 

Apple  Salad      Grape  Juice  Syllabub 

*Tilden  Cake 

Coffee 

*Tilden  Cake — Cream  }i  cup  Crisco 

with    \}4    cups    sugar,    add    4    well 

beaten   eggs,    1    cup    milk,    sift   in    3 


cups  flour,  ^  teaspoon  salt,  >^  cup 
cornstarch,  2  teaspoons  baking  pow- 
der, and  add  2  teaspoons  lemon 
extract.  Turn  into  Criscoed  and 
floured  cake  tin  and  bake  for  1^ 
hours  in  moderate  oven. 

August  13 

*  Roast   Fowl   with    Chestnuts    and 
Mushrooms. 

Franconia  Potatoes       Shell  Beans 
Lettuce  and  Tomato  Salad 
Peach  Short-Cake     Coffee 
*  Roast  Fowl  with  Chestnuts  and  Mush- 
rooms— Stuff  1  large  or  2  small  fowls 
with  chestnuts  or  mushroom  stuffing, 
truss   it,   brush   with    melted   Crisco, 
dust  with  salt  and  pepper,  and  put  on 
a  rack  in  pan  and  in  a  hot  oven  until 
beginning  to  brown,  reduce  heat,  and 
cook    1    or    2    hours,    basting    often. 
Add  to  pan  Jfi  cup  hot  water,  1  slice 
salt   pork,   diced,    tiny   bit    bay  leaf, 

1  clove,  and  sprig  of  parsley.  If 
with  mushrooms  pour  over  little 
sherry  mixed  with  cream.  When 
done  place  fowl  on  platter,  pour  off 
all  fat  in  pan  but  3  tablespoons,  add 

2  tablespoons  flour  and  slightly  color, 
add  1  cup  stock  from  giblets  cooked 
with  1  slice  of  salt  pork,  salt  and 
pepper,  a  little  lemon  juice,  and 
minced  giblets.  Serve  surrounded 
with  chestnut  or  mushroom  puree 
put  through  a  pastry  bag  and  tube 
in  roses.  Place  a  small  piece  of 
canned  red  pepper  on  each  rose  and 
serve  gravy  in  boat. 

August  14 

Celery  Soup 

Braised  Ox  Tongue 

*Mashed  Turnips  Baked  Potatoes 

Waldorf  Salad 

Ginger  Ice  Cream        Coffee 

*Mashed   Turnips — Peel    and    dice   3 

turnips,    cover    with    boiling    salted 

water  and  cook  till  tender;  drain  and 

press   the   water   well    out   of  them. 

Return  to  pan  and  add  3  tablespoons 

Crisco,   1   teaspoon   salt,   and   1    salr- 

spoon   white   pepper,   beat   and  mash 

them   well  together,  when  thoroughly 

hot  turn  into  vegetable  dish  and  serve. 


202 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


August  15 

Fish  Souffle 
Braised  Stuffed  Shoulder  of  Mutton 
Breaded  Potatoes   *Carrots,  a  la  Poulette 
Pineapple  Jelly 

French  Pastry 
Coffee 
*Carrots,a  la  Poulette — Boil  2  bunches 
of  carrots  until  tender  in  boiling 
salted  water,  then  drain.  Blend  2 
tablespoons  Crisco  with  1  tablespoon 
flour,  when  smooth  add  1  cup  milk 
and  stir  till  boiling,  add  salt,  pepper 
and  paprika  to  taste,  1  tablespoon 
chopped  parsley  and  cook  for  5  min- 
utes, then  add  carrots  and  allow  to 
cook  for  5  minutes  longer.     Serve  hot. 

August  16 

Cream  of  Rice  Soup 

Hanoverian  Steaks 

*  Hashed  Browned  Potatoes 

Carrots  en  Casserole 

Custard  Souffle,  Foamy  Sauce 

Coffee 

*  Hashed  Browned  Potatoes — Sprinkle 

2}4    cups    cold    boiled    potato    cubes 

with   salt   and   white   pepper  to  suit 

taste.     Melt  lyi  tablespoons  Crisco; 

add   1    tablespoon   flour   and   ^   cup 

brown     stock.       Cook     5     minutes; 

add  potato  cubes;  cook   10  minutes, 

stirring,   without    breaking    potatoes. 

Melt  1  tablespoon  Crisco  in  another 

frying    pan.      When    brown,    turn   in 

potatoes,    spread    evenly,    and    cook 

10  minutes;  fold  like  an  omelet,  and 

serve  hot. 

August  17 

Lamb  Chops 

Peas         *Chantilly  Potatoes 

Turkish  Salad 

Fruit  Ice  Cream 

Coffee 

*Chantilly    Potatoes — Prepare    nicely 

seasoned,    lightly    mashed     potatoes 

and  mound  on  a  hot  platter.  Beat  yi 

cup  cream  until  stiff,  add  1  teaspoon 

melted  Crisco,  ^  cup  grated  cheese, 

season  to  taste  with  salt,  pepper  and 

red   pepper.      Pile  lightly  on   to  the 

potato    and    put    in    oven  to  brown. 

Be  sure  that  the  oven  is  very  hot. 


August  18 

Watermelon  Cocktail 
Cannelon  of  Beef 
Potatoes     *Creamed  Kohl  Rabi 
Stuffed  Celery 
Meringues  Filled  with  Ice  Cream 
Coffee 
*Creamed  Kohl  Rabi — Slice  kohl  rabi, 
boil  20  minutes  or  until   nearly  ten- 
der, and  arrange  in  a  baking  dish  in 
layers     with     the     following     sauce: 
2   tablespoons   Crisco,   2   tablespoons 
flour,  y2  pint  milk,  ^  teaspoon  salt, 
and  1  saltspoon  pepper.     Rub  Crisco 
and   flour  together;   add   milk,   cold. 
Stand    saucepan    over    fire    and    stir 
continually     until     it     reaches     the 
boiling  point;  take  from  fire,  and  add 
salt      and      pepper.        Then      strain. 
Season   each   layer  with    pepper   and 
salt,  sprinkle    the    top    with    bread- 
crumbs and  bake  20  minutes. 

Vegetarian 

August  19 

Cream  of  Turnip  Soup 

Risotto 

Asparagus  Salad 

Coffee  Souffle 

*Ginger  Crisps 

Iced  Tea 

*Ginger  Crisps — Cream  14  cup  Crisco 

with  yi  cup  sugar,  add  1  cup  molasses, 

1    teaspoon    each    of   cinnamon    and 

nutmeg,  1  teaspoon  salt,  2  teaspoons 

baking    powder,    and    flour    to    make 

stiflish    dough.      Roll    thin,    cut   out 

with  cutter  and  bake  in  quick  oven. 

August  20 

Corned  Beef 

Buttered  Potatoes  *  New  Beets 

Lettuce,  Italian  Dressing 

Tapioca  Cream 

Coffee 

*  New  Beets — Peel  hot  cooked   beets, 

cut   into   slices,    and   toss   about   for 

3    or   4   minutes   in   saucepan   which 

contains     3     tablespoons     Crisco    to 

which    has    been    added    1   teaspoon 

plain    vinegar,    or    a    few    drops    of 

tarragon,   2   cloves,   and   1   teaspoon 

sugar. 


203 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


August  21 

Cold  Sliced  Corned  Beef 
Baked  Potatoes      Jellied  Vegetables 
Pea  Salad 
*Countess  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Countess  Pudding — Line  small  Cris- 
coed     platter     with     Crisco     pastry. 
Put  1  tablespoon  Crisco  in  saucepan, 
add    1    cup    milk,    when   warm    pour 
over  three  tablespoons  chopped  cocoa- 
nut,  add   1  tablespoon  sugar.     Allow 
to  remain   30   minutes,   add   3   yolks 
of  eggs  well  beaten,  and  l4  teaspoon 
vanilla,    pour   into    platter,    bake   30 
minutes     in     hot     oven.       Beat     up 
whites    of   eggs,    add    pinch    salt,    1 
tablespoon    sugar,    and    }4    teaspoon 
almond  extract,  pile  on  top  of  pud- 
ding   and     sprinkle    with     cocoanut. 
Brown  in  slow  oven.    Servehot  or  cold. 

Vegetarian 
August  22 

*Succotash    French  Fried  Potatoes 

Tomato  Jelly  Salad 

Orange  Marmalade  Ice  Cream 

Caramel  Cake 

Coffee 

*Succoiash — Boil     1     dozen     ears    of 

corn  for  3  minutes.     Cut  corn  from 

cob,    taking    very    small    piece    from 

top  of  each  grain,  then  press  out  pulp. 

Mix    this    with    an    equal    quantity 

of   nicely    cooked    lima    beans;    add 

Crisco,    salt    and    white    pepper    to 

taste;  reheat  and  serve. 

August  23 

Fish  Timhales,  Cream  Sauce 

Mashed  Potatoes         Stewed  Okra 

Cucumber  Salad 

Cheese  Straws 

*St.  Leonard's  Pudding 

Coffee 

*St.  Leonard's  Pudding — Line  edge  of 

a    pudding    dish    with    pastry,    and 

spread   2  tablespoons  of  jam  in  the 

bottom.     Blend  4  tablespoons  Crisco 

with  }4  cup  flour,  when  smooth  stir 

in  1  cup  milk,  4  tablespoons  sugar,  1 

teaspoon  vanilla  extract,  yi  teaspoon 

salt,  and  2  yolks  of  eggs,  stir  well 


together  and  pour  over  jam,  bake  30 
minutes.  Beat  up  whites  of  eggs 
to  a  stiff  froth,  add  1  tablespoon 
sugar,  and  arrange  roughly  on  the 
top.  Place  in  oven  until  lightly 
browned. 

August  24 

*Boiled  Mutton,  Caper  Sauce 
Riced  Potatoes  String  Beans 

Olive  Salad 
Toasted  Crackers  Cheese 

Plum  Compote  Coffee 

*Boiled  Mutton — Wipe  leg  of  mutton, 
put  on  fire,  barely  covered  with  boil- 
ing water,  and  let  boil  about  10 
minutes,  then  simmer  until  tender; 
season  with  salt  when  half  cooked. 
A  few  slices  of  onion,  turnip,  and 
carrot,  or  2  or  3  stalks  of  celery, 
may  be  added  while  cooking.  When 
tender,  brush  over  the  meat  with 
melted  Crisco  and  sprinkle  with 
finely  chopped  parsley.  Serve  with 
caper  sauce  which  is  made  as  follows: 
Mix  2  tablespoons  Crisco  with  1 
tablespoon  flour;  add  1  cup  boiling 
water;  stir  it  over  fire  until  thick; 
add  to  it  1  hard-cooked  egg  chopped 
fine  and  2  tablespoons  of  capers. 

August  25 

Barley  Broth 

Mutton  Souffle 
Sweet  Corn    Creamed  Carrots  and  Peas 

*  Peach  Cobbler 
Coffee 
*  Peach  Cobbler — Sift  1>^  cups  flour 
and  \}4  teaspoons  baking  powder. 
With  tips  of  fingers  work  ihto  flour 
1  tablespoon  Crisco,  and  when  well 
mixed  add  }4  cup  milk. 

Peel  and  slice  4  peaches,  and  mix 
with  f^  cup  sugar  and  2  tablespoons 
melted  Crisco.  In  bottom  of  baking 
dish  invert  a  cup,  around  this  ar- 
range peaches,  and  over  all  place 
dough  patted  out  to  about  ^  of  an 
inch  in  thickness.  Bake  in  moderate 
oven  until  crust  is  brown  and  peaches 
are  tender.  This  will  require  about 
40  minutes.  The  cup  keeps  dough 
from  lying  on  fruit  and  becoming 
soaked  with  juice. 


204 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


August  26 

*Beef  Steak  Pudding 
Spaghetti  with  Tomato 

Potatoes  on  Half  Shell 
Green  Pepper  Salad 
Apricot  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Beef  Steak  Pudding — Line  a  Criscoed 
basin  with  plain  pastry.  Mix  to- 
gether on  a  plate  1  tablespoon  flour, 
1  teaspoon  salt,  and  j4  teaspoon 
pepper  for  seasoning.  Gut  1  pound 
lean  beef  in  thin  slices,  dip  them  in 
the  seasoning,  and  place  them  lightly 
in  the  basin;  split  1  sheep's  kidney, 
skin  and  cut  in  thin  slices;  dip  them 
also  in  the  seasoning,  and  put  them 
in  basin,  and  pour  over  1  cup  of 
water  for  gravy.  Wet  the  edges  of 
the  paste  on  basin;  roll  out  a  piece 
of  paste  large  enough  to  cover  the 
dish;  place  it  on,  press  down  at  the 
edges,  and  sprinkle  a  little  flour  over 
top.  Now  dip  a  pudding  cloth  in 
boiling  water,  tie  it  tightly  over  the 
top,  and  plunge  the  pudding  in 
plenty  of  boiling  water;  then  boil 
for  3  hours.  Remove  the  cloth,  and 
turn  the  pudding  out  on  a  dish. 
Liver  and  bacon  mixed,  or  mutton, 
makes  a  good  pudding  of  this  kind. 


August  27 

Steamed  Clams 

Vegetable  Salad 
Brown  Bread  Sandwiches 
Peach  Tapioca 
*  Princess  Cake 
Coffee 
*Princess    Cake — Line    small    square 
cake    tin    with    plain    Crisco    pastry. 
Sprinkle  in  ]/2  cup  cleaned  currants. 
Cream  yi  cup  Crisco  with  1  cup  sugar, 
then  add  3  well  beaten  eggs,  3  cups 
flour,   Xyi  teaspoons  baking  powder, 
and   yi  teaspoon  salt.      Divide   mix- 
ture into  2   portions.     Add   1   table- 
spoon grated   chocolate  and  4  table- 
spoons milk  to  1   portion.     Put  cake 
mixtures  in  spoonfuls  on  top  of  cur- 
rants and  bake  in  moderate  oven  for 
35  minutes.     Serve  in  square  pieces. 


August  28 

Iced  Bouillon 

Pulled  Bread 

*Fillet  of  Beef ,  Horseradish  Sauce 

Franc onia  Potatoes 

Corn  Souffle 
Endive,  French  Dressing 
Salted  Triangles 

Violet  Mousse 
Coffee 
*FiUet  of  Beef — Trim  fillet  into  good 
shape.  Lard  it  plentifully,  letting 
the  whole  upper  surface  be  per- 
forated with  lardoons.  Place  in 
baking  pan  thin  slices  of  larding 
pork,  over  pork  place  layer  of  chop- 
ped onion,  carrots,  turnip,  and  celery; 
lay  tenderloin  on  top.  Pour  in  1  cup 
stock,  add  ]4  teaspoon  salt,  X  tea- 
spoon pepper,  4  sprigs  parsley,  1  bay 
leaf,  and  2  cloves.  Bake  in  hot  oven 
30  minutes,  and  baste  frequently. 
Remove  when  done;  strain  off  gravy 
and  skim  off  grease.  Blend  1  table- 
spoon Crisco  with  1  tablespoon 
flour  in  a  pan,  add  gravy  strained 
from  pan,  yi  cup  grated  horseradish, 
salt  and  paprika  to  taste  and  bring 
to  boiling  point,  then  add  2  table- 
spoons lemon  juice  and  1  tablespoon 
vinegar.  Spread  sauce  on  hot  serv- 
ing dish  and  lay  fillet  on  it. 


Vegetarian 


August  29 


Baked  Macaroni,  Tomato  Sauce 
Green  Corn 
Fried  Egg  Plant 
Cantaloupe  Salad 
Marmalade  Pudding 
Iced  Coffee 
*Fried  Egg  Plant  —  Peel     good-sized 
egg  plant;  cut  into  slices  of  yi  incl). 
Dust    with    salt    and    pepper;   dip   in 
beaten     egg;     roll     in     fine     bread- 
crumbs   and     saute    in    hot    Crisco. 
When  they  are  brown  on  1  side,  turn 
and    brown    on    the    other.      If   pre- 
ferred, the  egg  plant  may  be  dipped 
in    thin    barter    instead    of  egg    and 
crumbs,  and  fried. 


205 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


August  30 

*Clam  Chowder 
Stuffed  Tomato  Salad       Welsh  Rarebit 

Lemon  Pie  Coffee 
*Clam  Chowder — Remove  heads  from 
4  cups  clams  and  chop.  Parboil  4 
cups  potatoes.  Cook  1  chopped 
onion  and  }4  cup  salt  pork  cut  in 
cubes  IS  minutes.  Arrange  clams, 
potatoes,  onion  and  pork  in  layers 
in  saucepan;  cover  with  3  cups  boil- 
ing water,  and  simmer  till  tender. 
Blend  3  tablespoons  Crisco  with  2 
tablespoons  flour,  add  4  cups  scalded 
milk  and  stir  till  boiling;  add  clam 
mixture,  seasonings  to  taste,  1  dash 
of  Tabasco  sauce,  and  serve  hot. 

August  31 

Bisque  of  Clams  and  Peas 
Stuffed  Peppers 
*Cheese  Salad  Toasted  Crackers 

Lemon  Sherbet  Whipped  Cream 
Coffee 
*Cheese  Salad — To  1  cup  cooked 
chopped  chicken,  add  }4  pound  soft 
American  cheese  and  ^4  cup  pickled 
chopped  cauliflower.  Rub  through 
sieve,  yolks  of  2  hard-cooked  eggs, 
add  1  teaspoon  French  mustard,  4 
tablespoons  melted  Crisco,  3  table- 
spoons vinegar,  red  pepper,  paprika, 
and  salt  to  taste.  Pour  this  sauce 
over  salad  and  garnish  with  whites  of 
eggs  cut  in  slices  and  branches  of 
pickled  cauliflower. 

September  1 

*Cauliflower  Soup 
Roast  Beef,  Brown  Gravy 
Oven- Panned  Potatoes 
Creamed  Carrots 
Celery  and  Green   Pepper  Salad 
Coffee 
*Caulifiower    Soup — Cut    large    par- 
boiled   cauliflower   into   thick    slices, 
also  2   large   onions   and   heart   of  a 
stalk    of  celery.      Fry   these    in    hot 
Crisco.    When  done  to  a  golden  color, 
remove    them    from    pan    to    drain. 
Have  ready  stewpan  of  chicken  and 
veal    stock,    ready    seasoned    as    for 
table,   then   place  in   slices   of  cauli- 
flower, onions,  and  celery,  and  allow 


them  to  simmer  until  vegetables 
can  be  broken  with  2  forks.  Add 
to  this  1  glass  of  Madeira  wine.  Pull 
stewpan  aside,  and  stir  in  2  beaten 
yolks  of  eggs,  and  enough  cream  to 
make  whole  thickness  of  rich  cream. 
Let  all  simmer,  but  not  boil.  Send  to 
table  with  small  dice-shaped  pieces 
of  toast. 

September  2 

Caviare  on  Toast 
Fricassee  of  Chicken     Banana  Fritters 
Boiled  Potatoes      Creamed  Onions 
Vegetable  Salad 
*Snow  Pudding  with  Custard 
Coffee 
*Snow  Pudding  with  Custard — Mix  2 
tablespoons  arrowroot  with  3  table- 
spoons cold   milk.      Boil   1   cup  milk 
then  pour  it  on  to  mixed  arrowroot, 
pour  back  into  pan  and  boil  gently 
for  8  minutes,  stirring  all  the  time, 
then  allow  to  cool.     Stir  in  yolks  of 
2  eggs,  2  tablespoons  Crisco,  }-i  tea- 
spoon salt,  3  tablespoons  sugar,  pour 
into    Criscoed     pudding    dish;    beat 
whites   of  eggs   to   a   stiflP  froth   and 
mix   lightly   in.      Dust   nutmeg   over 
top   and   bake  in   moderate  oven   10 
minutes.    Serve  quickly  with  custard. 

September  3 

*Stewed  Liver  with  Mushrooms 
Baked  Potatoes        Scalloped  Egg  Plant 
Celery  and  Apple  Salad     Peach  Trifle 

Sponge  Cake  Coffee 
*Stewed  Liver  with  Mushrooms — Melt 
1  tablespoon  Crisco  and  add  1^ 
tablespoons  flour.  Brown  by  long 
slow  cooking.  Add  salt  and  pepper 
and  2  cups  water.  Cook  till  as  thick 
as  good  cream.  Have  1  pound  of 
calf's  liver  cut  into  2 -inch  cubes. 
Pour  boiling  water  over  them  and 
drain  immediately.  Drop  these  into 
brown  sauce  and  cook  slowly  10  or  12 
minutes.  They  must  not  cook  rapidly 
nor  too  long.  In  the  meantime  peel 
some  mushrooms  if  they  are  fresh  and 
require  such  treatment,  and  drop  into 
melted  Crisco  and  allow  to  simmer. 
Just  before  taking  up  liver  add  mush- 
rooms. 


206 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


September  4 

Noodle  Soup       Lamb  Chops 

*Cauliflower         French  Fried  Potatoes 

Watercress  Salad 

Plum  Tart  Coffee 

*Caulifl(Koer — Boil  and  drain  1  cauli- 
flower and  dredge  top  with  pepper 
and  salt,  sprinkle  with  grated  cheese, 
and  pour  little  melted  Crisco  over 
it.  Set  in  oven  for  5  minutes  to 
brown,  and  serve  surrounded  with 
tomato  sauce. 

September  5 

Hot  Boiled  Tongue,  Lemon  Sauce 

Boiled  Potatoes   French  Fried  Parsnips 

Cauliflower  Salad 

*Baked  Quinces  Jam  Cake  Coffee 
*]am  Cake — Cream  ^  cup  Crisco 
with  1  cup  sugar,  add  3  well  beaten 
eggs,  yi  cup  sour  cream,  1  teaspoon 
soda,  2  cups  flour,  yi  glass  straw- 
berry preserves,  1  teaspoon  cinnamon, 
yi  teaspoon  each  cloves,  J^  tea- 
spoon nutmeg,  and  ^-2  teaspoon  salt, 
mix  and  bake  in  layers.  Put  straw- 
berry preserves  between  layers,  and 
white  icing  on  top. 

September  6 

Planked  Bluefish  with  Potato  Border 
Grilled  Tomatoes  *Corn  Creole 

Pepper  Salad       Cheese  Pasties 
Grape  Juice  Water  Ice  Coffee 

*Corn  Creole — Put  2  cans  corn  into 
saucepan  with  2  tablespoons  chopped 
green  peppers  and  1  cup  milk,  and 
cook  slowly  10  minutes;  season  with 
salt  and  pepper,  add  2  tablespoons 
Crisco  and  serve.  This  may  be  put 
in  baking  dish,  covered  with  bread- 
crumbs, and  baked   15  minutes. 

September  7 

*Chestnut  Soup 
Smothered  Chicken       Parsley  Potatoes 
Peppers  Stuffed  with  Corn 
Pineapple  Salad      Almond  Custard 
Coffee 
*Chestnut  Soup — Boil   1   quart  chest- 
nuts 20  minutes,  then  remove  shells 
and   brown  inner  skin,  and  put  into 
saucepan  with  suflScient  boiling  water 


to  cover  them.  Add  piece  lemon  rind 
and  1  teaspoon  salt,  when  soft  remove 
rind  and  rub  through  a  sieve.  Then 
pour  over  them  stirring  all  the  time, 
2  quarts  white  stock,  j4  cup  cream, 
1  tablespoon  Crisco  rolled  with  2 
tablespoons  flour,  seasoning  of  salt 
and  pepper.  Bring  to  boiling  point, 
remove  from  fire  and  serve  hot. 

September  8 

*  Planked  Smelts 
Baked  Lamb  Chops 
Breaded  Beets  Riced  Potatoes 

Avocado  Pear  Salad 
Apricot  Cream  Coffee 

*Planked  Smelts — Crisco  a  plank 
quite  generously,  and  place  upon  it 
smelts  that  have  been  split,  cleaned, 
and  seasoned,  and  squeeze  liberal 
amount  of  lemon  juice  over  them. 
Arrange  in  form  of  large  fish  shape, 
and  garnish  with  potato  roses  put  on 
with  pastry  tube  and  sprinkle  with 
tiny  bits  of  Crisco  and  finely  chopped 
parsley.  Place  plank  in  oven  and 
cook  until  potatoes  are  slightly 
browned.  Garnish  before  taking 
to  table  with  sliced  tomatoes  and 
cucumbers,  dressed  in  vinegar,  be- 
tween potato  roses. 

September  9 

Soft  Shell  Crabs  on  Toast 
Broiled  Steak 
Creamed  Potatoes  *Stuffed  Onions 

Oyster  Plant  Salad 
Mint  and  Pineapple  Sherbet 
Jumbles  Coffee 
*Stuffed  Onions — Boil  8  large  onions 
in  boiling  salted  water  till  tender. 
Drain,  and  with  sharp  knife  cut 
centers  from  each.  Mix  together  in  a 
basin  2  tablespoons  chopped  cooked 
ham,  3  tablespoons  crumbs,  2  table- 
spoons Crisco,  2  tablespoons  cream,  1 
beaten  egg,  salt,  pepper,  and  pap- 
rika to  taste,  and  1  tablespoon 
chopped  parsley.  Fill  with  this 
mixture,  sprinkle  each  with  crumbs 
and  dot  with  Crisco.  Place  on 
baking  dish  and  bake  in  moderate 
oven  1  hour.  Spanish  onions  are 
best  to  use. 


207 


A  Calendar  oj  Dinners 


September  10 

Braised  Ox  Tails  with  Chestnuts 

Boiled  Sweet  Potatoes 

*Baked  Stuped  Tomatoes 

Lima  Bean  Salad 

Peach  Chartreuse 

Cofee 

*Baked  Stuffed  Tomatoes — Prepare 
tomatoes  by  scooping  out  centers. 
Put  into  a  basin  1  cup  crumbs, 
season  with  salt  and  pepper,  1  dozen 
chopped  olives,  2  tablespoons  chop- 
ped capers,  1  tablespoon  chopped 
parsley,  1  tablespoon  Crisco,  beaten 
volks  3  eggs,  and  moisten  with  stock, 
rill  tomatoes  and  set  in  hot  oven  to 
bake.  Sprinkle  top  with  crumbs  and 
dot  with  Crisco. 

September  11 

Oysters  au  Gratin 

Sirloin  Steak,  Anchovy  Sauce 

Duchesse  Potatoes  *  Buttered  Beets 

Red  Cabbage  and  Celery  Salad 

Apricots  Parisienne 

Coffee 

*Buttered  Beets — Boil    1    dozen   small 

beets  in   plenty  of  water   and   when 

tender     put    into    cold     water,     slip 

peeling    off    of   them,    cut    them    in 

thin  slices  and  put  in  saucepan  with 

4   tablespoons   Crisco,    pinch   of  salt 

and  little  pepper.     Add   before  they 

are  quite  hot  1  tablespoon  vinegar. 

September  12 

Fish  Croquettes  Cucumber  Puree 

Broiled  Duckling,  Apple  Sauce 
*Fried  Cauliflower  Potatoes 

Olive  Salad 
Omelette  Souffle  Coffee 
*Fried  Cauliflower — Remove  large 
outside  leaves  from  cauliflower,  and 
cut  flowers  from  stalk  in  sym- 
metrical bunches  and  drop  in  salted 
ice  water  for  a  few  moments.  Cook 
in  scalded  milk  and  water  until 
tender,  then  drain  and  let  cool,  and 
rub  well  with  melted  Crisco,  which 
has  been  salted  and  peppered.  Dip 
into  frying  batter  and  fry  in  hot 
Crisco  until  golden  brown,  draining 
upon  white  paper. 

208 


September  13 

Clam  Cocktails 
*Stewed  Squabs  Grape  Jelly 

Potato  Balls  Green  Corn 

Watermelon  Frappe  Coffee 
*Stewed  Squabs — Cut  2  squabs  into 
neat  joints.  Put  1  cup  water  in 
saucepan  when  it  boils  lay  in  squabs, 
1  sliced  onion,  and  1  slice  of  carrot, 
simmer  for  \yi  hours.  Blend  2 
tablespoo.-is  Crisco  with  2  table- 
spoons H  lur,  add  1  cup  stock  from 
squabs,  salt  and  pepper  to  taste  and 
boil  for  5  minutes  stirring  all  the 
time.  Arrange  the  squabs  on  a  hot 
dish  and  strain  over  the  sauce. 

September  14 

Oysters         *  Porterhouse  Steak 
Scalloped  Tomatoes  Lima  Beans 

Apple  and  Chestnut  Salad 
Pear  Sponge  Coffee 
*  Porterhouse  Steak — Have  large  por- 
terhouse steak  well  trimmed  and 
shaped,  and  slit  with  sharp  knife 
an  opening  flatwise  through  sirloin 
and  tenderloin.  Make  forcemeat  of 
1  -lozen  olives  chopped,  2  pounded 
anchovies,  1  chopped  red  pepper,  salt 
and  onion  juice  to  taste,  and  2  table- 
spoons melted  Crisco.  With  this 
forcemeat  fill  smoothly  cavities  made 
in  steak.  Pinch  steak  together 
firmly  at  edges  and  set  away  on  ice 
for  1  hour  or  even  longer.  Broil 
them  over  clear  fire  and  serve  with- 
out sauce. 

September  15 

Pea  Soup 
*Impanada      Celery  Mayonnaise 
Apple  Trifle  Coffee 

*Impanada — Cut  up  raw  chicken* 
and  flour  each  piece  well.  Line  deep 
dish  with  slices  raw  sweet  potato, 
slices  raw  white  potato,  some  of 
chicken,  little  onion,  few  slices  of 
bacon,  salt  and  pepper  to  taste,  and 
1  can  of  tomatoes  chopped  fine.  2 
tablespoons  Crisco,  and  1  table- 
spoon vinegar.  Cover  top  of  dish 
with  sweet  and  white  potatoes.  Bake 
very    slowly    from    2    to    3    hours. 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Serve  hot.  This  takes  3  medium- 
sized  sweet  potatoes  and  6  medium- 
sized  white  potatoes. 

September  16 

*Baked  Ham 
Baked  Potatoes       Brussels  Sprouts 
Spiced  Grapes         Apple  Salad 
Ice  Cream  with  Kisses 
Cofee 
*Baked  Ham — Soak  ham  over  night 
then  wash  and  scrape  it.     Put  it  into 
cold  water;  let  it  come  to  boiling  point 
then  simmer  for  2  hours.    Let  the  ham 
cool   in  the  water;  then  remove  and 
draw  off  the  skin.     Bake  in  moderate 
oven  for  2  hours;  baste  it  frequently; 
using  1  cup  of  sherry  wine,   2  spoon- 
fuls at  a  time;  then  baste  with  melted 
Crisco.      When    done,    cover   with    a 
paste    made    of    browned    flour    and 
browned  sugar  moistened  with  sherry, 
and  return  to  oven  to  brown. 

SeptembM-  17 

*Oyster  Bisque 

Broiled  Lamb  Chops 

Griddled  Sweet  Potatoes 

Bean  Croquettes,   Tomato  Sauce 

Cauliflower  Salad 

Cocoanut  Custard  Coffee 

*Oyster  Bisque — Boil  1   quart  oysters 

in  their  own  liquor  with  about  1  pint 

mildly-flavored     white     stock.       Let 

boil  for   }4  an  hour  or   even  longer. 

Take    up    and    strain,    put    back    to 

boil,    season    with    salt    and    white 

pepper  as  needed,  add   1   quart  rich 

milk  and  }4  a  pint  of  cream.     Blend 

together    1    tablespoon    potato    flour 

with  1  tablespoon  melted  Crisco,  and 

with  this  thicken  soup  till  it  is  smooth 

and  velvety. 

September  18 

Hamburg  Loaf,  Tomato  Sauce 

Maitre  d' Hotel  Potatoes 

Beet  and  String  Bean  Salad 

Cheese  Creams 

*Chocolate  Pudding  with  Macaroons 

Coffee 
*Chocolate  Pudding  with  Macaroons — 
Put  3   cups   milk  to   boil.      Have  5 


tablespoons  grated  chocolate  in  pan 
with  yi  cup  boiling  water  and  4 
tablespoons  sugar.  When  chocolate 
paste  is  smooth  pour  in  milk.  Mi.x 
4  tablespoons  cornstarch  with  1  cup 
milk,  add  I  teaspoon  Crisco,  and  }^ 
teaspoon  salt,  and  with  this  thicken 
boiling  milk.  Add  1  cup  macaroon 
crumbs  and  beaten  whites  of  2 
eggs.  Pour  into  wet  mold  and  set 
on  ice  1  hour. 

September  19 

Vegetable  Soup 
Roast  Spare  Ribs,  Apple  Sauce 
*Sweet  Potatoes,  Southern  Style 

Orange  Custard 
Coffee 

*Sweet  Potatoes,  Southern  Style — Bake 
sweet  potatoes  until  thoroughly  done. 
Remove  from  oven  and  cut  in  halves 
lengthwise;  remove  potato  from  skins 
carefully,  so  as  to  keep  skins  in  con- 
dition to  refill.  Mash  potato,  adding 
sufficient  melted  Crisco  and  cream  to 
moisten.  The  potato  mixture  should 
be    of    the    consistency    of    mashed 


back 
pepper. 


potato    when     put 

Season    with     salt, 

very     little     sherry.        Refill 

brush    tops    with    Crisco   and 

5  minutes  in  hot  oven. 


shells. 

and     a 

skins, 

brown 


September  20 

Broiled  Striped  Bass 

Porterhouse  Steak  with  Olives 

Baked  Creamed  Potatoes 

*Asparagus,    Italian   Style 

String  Bean  Salad 

Pineapple  Fluff 

Coffee 

*Asparagus,  Italian  Style — Cut  ten- 
der parts  of  2  bunches  of  asparagus 
into  short  lengths  and  set  to  boil 
till  quite  tender.  Take  up,  drain, 
and  put  into  saucepan  with  3  table- 
spoons melted  Crisco,  few  drops 
lemon  juice,  sprinkling  of  red  pep- 
per and  salt.  Let  get  thoroughly 
hot,  take  up,  and  serve  on  slices  of 
fried  bread. 


209 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


September  21 

Fried  Cod  Steaks 
Sweet  Potatoes  Boiled  Onions 

Cucumber  Salad 

JValnut  Pudding 
*Feather  Cake 
Coffee 
*Feather  Cake — Cream  J^  cup  Crisco 
with  }/i  cup  sugar,  and  >j   teaspoon 
salt,  and  2  eggs  beaten  with  yj  cup 
sugar,    1    teaspoon   lemon   extract,    1 
cup   milk,    2}^    cups   flour,    and   2^2 
teaspoons    baking    powder.      Beat   2 
minutes  and  turn  into  Criscoed  and 
floured  cake  tin.     Bake  in  moderate 
oven  for  ^  of  an  hour. 

September  22 

Cream  of  Barley  Soup 
*Shepherd's  Pie 
Broiled  Tomatoes 
Cucumber  Salad  with  Red  Peppers 
Wine  Jelly 
Coffee 
*Shepherd's     Pie — Chop      1      pound 
cooked   meat,   mix  in   2   tablespoons 
breadcrumbs,    1    chopped    onion,    1 
tablespoon    chopped    parsley,    1    cup 
gravy,   salt   and    pepper   to   taste,   2 
tablespoons     Crisco,     half    teaspoon 
powdered    herbs,    and    1    tablespoon 
tomato  catsup.     Turn  into  fireproof 
dish  and  cover  with  thick   layer   sea- 
soned mashed  potatoes.     Brush  over 
with  beaten  egg  and  dot  with  pieces 
of  Crisco.     Bake  20  minutes. 

September  23 

*Mock  Duck,  Rice  Stuffing 
Buttered  Beets  Succotash 

Lettuce  Salad 

Grape  Sherbet 
Coffee 
*Mock  Duck — 1  cup  chopped  celery, 
2  cups  breadcrumbs,  2  cups  chopped 
black  walnut  meats,  2  cups  boiled 
rice,  6  hard-cooked  eggs,  3  raw  eggs, 
1  tablespoon  grated  onion,  1  table- 
spoon salt,  1  saltspoon  pepper,  and  2 
tablespoons  Crisco. 

Cook  crumbs  with  1  pint  water  for 
5  minutes;  add  celery,  hard-cooked 
eggs,  chopped;  remove  from  fire,  add 


Crisco,  nuts,  rice  and  seasonings. 
Mix  well  with  raw  eggs,  slightly  beaten. 
Form  into  shape  of  duck,  brush  over 
with  melted  Crisco  and  bake  1  hour. 
Serve  with  apple  sauce. 

September  24 

Macaroni  Soup 
Fried  Scallops 
Tournedos,  a  la  Bordelaise 
Mashed  Potatoes  Baked  Tomatoes 

*Cold  Slaw 
Queen  Mab  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Cold   Slaw — Cut    2    cabbages    very 
fine  and  put  it  in  salad  bowl.     Boil 
2   tablespoons   vinegar.      Beat    up   2 
eggs,  add  ^2  cup  sour  cream,  2  table- 
spoons    Crisco    and     add     them     to 
boiled    vinegar.      Stir    over    fire    till 
boiling,  add   1  teaspoon  salt  and  yi 
teaspoon  pepper,  pour  over  cabbage, 
and  it  is  ready  to  serve  when  very 
cold. 

September  25 

Broiled  Butterfish 
Fried  Potatoes 
Cucumber  Salad  Cheese  Balls 

*Bread  Pudding  with  Cherries 
Coffee 
*Bread  Pudding  with  Cherries — Soak 
^  pound  bread  in  cold  water  till 
soft.  Press  out  water  and  beat  out 
any  lumps  with  fork.  Add  2  table- 
spoons Crisco,  2  tablespoons  sugar, 
J4  teaspoon  vanilla  extract,  and  yi 
pound  glace  cherries  and  1  teaspoon 
baking  powder.  Mix  well,  and  add 
1  well-beaten  egg  and  3  tablespoons 
milk.  Put  into  Criscoed  basin  and 
cover  with  Criscoed  paper,  and 
steam  for  1^  hours. 

September  26 

Feal  Cutlets  Sliced  Lemon 

Baked  Cucumbers     Lvonnaise  Potatoes 
Red  Pepper  Salad 

*  Amber  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Amber     Pudding — Peel,     core,     and 

ouarter  8  apples.     Put  3  tablespoons 

Crisco   in    a    pan,   when    warm    add 


210 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


apples,  3  tablespoons  sugar,  grated 
rind  1  lemon,  and  stew  slowly  till 
soft,  then  rub  through  a  sieve.  Add 
yolks  of  3  eggs,  and  yi  teaspoon  cin- 
namon. Roll  out  Crisco  pastry 
thinly,  cut  ofF  a  strip  and  press  it  on 
to  the  edge  of  a  wet  pudding  dish. 
Put  apple  mixture  into  dish  and  bake 
for  30  minutes  in  a  hot  oven.  Beat 
up  whites  of  eggs  with  ^  teaspoon 
salt,  to  stiff  froth,  add  2  teaspoons 
sugar  and  2  drops  vanilla.  Heap  this 
meringue  all  over  apple  mixture. 
Dust  with  sugar  and  place  here  and 
there  a  glace  cherry.  Replace  in  oven 
to  brown  slightly. 


September  27 

Pot  Roast  of  Beef,  Gravy 
Parsnips  Boiled  Potatoes 

Stuffed  Cucumber  Salad 

*Conservative  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Conservative  Pudding — The  weight 
of  3  eggs  in  Crisco,  sugar,  and  flour. 
Beat  Crisco  and  sugar  to  a  cream, 
add  flour,  1  teaspoon  baking  powder, 
and  mix  slowly  with  eggs.  Add  ^ 
teaspoon  vanilla  extract  and  mix 
all  well.  Ornament  a  Criscoed  mold 
with  raisins,  pour  in  mixture,  steam 
2  hours  and  serve  hot  with  milk. 


September  28 

Pea  Soup 
Boiled  Tripe,  Cream  Sauce 
Stewed  Celery        Mashed  Potatoes 
Beet  Salad 
Meringues  with  Sliced  Peaches 
*  Almond  Fingers 
Coffee 
*Almond  Fingers — 2    cups    flour,    yi 
cup    Crisco,     1    egg,    2    tablespoons 
sugar,  and  ^  teaspoon  baking  pow- 
der.     Rub    Crisco    into    flour,    add 
sugar  and  baking  powder.    Make  into 
stiff  paste  with  egg.      Roll   out   and 
cut  into  fingers.    Chop  1  cup  almonds 
and    mix   with    }^   cup   sifted    sugar, 
and  white  of  1  egg.    Spread  on  fingers 
and  bake  quickly  a  light  brown /olor. 


September  29 

*  Pilau  of  Fowl 

Glazed  Carrots     Potatoes  au  GrattH 

Lettuce  and  N asturtium  Salad 

Vanilla  Eclairs 

Coffee 

*  Pilau  of  Fowl — Truss  fowl  for  boil- 
ing, place  in  pan  with  3  cups  stock  or 
water  and  simmer  30  minutes.  Wash 
and  dry  1  cup  rice.  Melt  2  table- 
spoons Crisco  and  fry  1  chopped  onion 
to  golden  brown  in  it;  remove  onion 
to  plate,  add  2  extra  tablespoons 
Crisco  and  fry  rice  and  X  cup  blanched 
almonds  till  yellow,  add  onion,  2 
tablespoons  seeded  raisins,  with  salt 
and  paprika  to  taste.  Tie  in  piece  of 
muslin  3  cloves,  6  whole  white  pep- 
pers, 1  bay  leaf,  and  1  inch  cinnamon 
stick  and  add  them.  Make  hole  in 
center  of  rice,  lay  fowl  in  it,  pour  in  1 
cup  of  the  stock,  let  simmer  until 
fowl  and  rice  are  cooked,  adding  more 
stock  as  rice  swells.  Turn  fowl  over 
during  cooking.  Serve  fowl  with  rice 
around  it. 

September  30 

Raw  Oysters 

Steamed  Fish,  Lemon  Sauce 

Potatoes  Stuffed  Tomatoes 

Radish  and  Lettuce  Salad 

*  Hot  Cheese  Sandwiches 

Vanilla  Cream  Puffs 

Coffee 

*  Hot  Cheese  Sandwiches — Melt  J^ 
pound  cheese  with  3  tablespoons 
Crisco,  }4  teaspoon  salt,  few  grains 
red  pepper,  and  1  teaspoon  mustard; 
moisten  with  a  little  vinegar  and 
spread  between  thin  slices  of  white 
bread.     Cut  into  neat  rounds. 

October  1 

Veal  Cutlets 

Rice  Croquettes  Lima  Beans 

Cabbage  and  Apple  Salad 

*Nut  Pudding 

Coffee 

*  Nut  Pudding — 1  cup  •soft  bread- 
crumbs, 2  cups  scalded  milk,  1 
tablespoon    Crisco,    1    cup    chopped 


211 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


nuts,  yi  teaspoon  salt,  2  egg  yolks,  }i 
cup  sugar,  juice  and  grated  rind  of  1 
lemon,  2  egg  whites  beaten  until 
stiff,  and  2  squares  chocolate,  melted. 
Mix  breadcrumbs,  milk,  Crisco,  nuts, 
salt,  egg  yolks,  sugar,  chocolate, 
juice  and  rind  of  lemon.  When  well 
blended,  cut  and  fold  in  whites  of 
eggs;  pour  into  Criscoed  individual 
molds,  and  bake  20  to  30  minutes. 
Serve  hot  with  cream. 

Vegetarian 

October  2 

Tomato  Bisque  Crackers 

Baked  Sweet  Potatoes  Baked  Beans 

Corn  Fritters 

Lettuce,  French  Dressing 
*Orange  Pie 
Cofee 
*Orange  Pie — Line  pie  tin  with  Crisco 
pastry.  Beat  yolks  of  3  eggs  with  1 
cup  sugar  till  light;  add  1  tablespoon 
cornstarch,  ^  cup  milk,  grated  rind 
and  strained  juice  of  1  orange. 
Place  in  double  boiler  and  stir  til!  it 
thickens,  then  pour  on  to  crust  and 
bake  30  minutes.  Cover  top  with 
meringue  made  with  whites  of  eggs 
and  sweetened  with  3  tablespoons 
sugar  and  flavored  with  1  teaspoon 
orange  extract.  Place  in  oven  to 
brown. 


October  3 


Vegetarian 


Cream  of  Lettuce  Soup 
*  Vegetable  Souffle 
Baked  Potatoes     Boiled  Cj;^^  Peppers 
Stuffed  Egg  Sat  ad 
Apple  Tapioca 
Coffee 
*Fegetable    Souffle— B\end     3     table- 
spoons   Crisco    with    2    tablespoons 
flour,  add  1  cup  milk,  stir  till  boiling, 
add   }4   cup  grated   cheese,  yolks  of 
2   eggs,   2   tablespoons  chopped   par- 
sley, seasoning  of  salt,   pepper,   and 
red  pepper,  and  cook  till  it  thickens. 
Remove    from    fire    and    fold    in 
stiffly   beaten   whites   of  eggs.      Put 
some  pieces  of  boiled  cauliflower  into 
Criscoed  mold,  then  slices  of  season- 


ed tomatoes.  Pour  in  mixture, 
sprinkle  on  few  crumbs  and  bake 
till  firm.  Garnish  with  watercress 
and  serve  immediately. 


October  4 


Vegetarian 


Almond  Soup 
*  Nut  Loaf,  Cranberry  Jelly 
Lima  Beans    Carameled  Sweet  Potatoes 
Onion  Souffle 
Butterscotch  Pie 
Orange  Ice 
Coffee 
*  Nut   Loaf — Mix    together    1    table- 
spoon Crisco,  1  cup  chopped  English 
walnuts  and  almonds,  1  cup  crumbs, 
^3     teaspoon    salt,    dash     pepper,     1 
large    ground    onion,    3    tablespoons 
flour,  2  well-beaten  eggs  and    1   cup 
milk.      Pour    into    Criscoed    pudding 
dish  and  bake  30  minutes. 


Vegetarian 


October  5 


Baked  Chestnuts 
Galantine  of  Lentils 
Escalloped  Tomatoes 
Fruit  Salad 
*  Apple  Charlotte 
Coffee 
*Apple     Charlotte — Cut     bread     into 
slices  }4  inch  thick;  then  into  strips 
lyi  inches  wide,  and  as  long  as  the 
height    of  mold    to    be    used;    cut    1 
piece  to  fit  top  of  mold,  then  divide 
it  into  5  or  6  pieces.     Crisco  mold; 
dip  slices  of  bread  in  melted  Crisco, 
and    arrange    them    on    bottom    and 
around  sides  of  mold,  fitting  closely 
together  or  overlapping.     Fill  center 
entirely  full  with   apple  sauce  made 
of  tart  apples  stewed  until  tender,  sea- 
soned with  Crisco  and  sugar.   A  little 
apricot  jam  can   be  put   in  center  if 
desired;  chopped    almonds    also  may 
be  added.    Cover  top  with  bread,  and 
bake    in    hot  oven  30  minutes.     The 
bread  should  be  an  amber  color  like 
toast.      Turn   it  carefully  on   to  flat 
dish.    Serve  with  any  sauce  that  you 
like. 


212 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Vegetarian 
October  6 

Creole  Chowder 

Stuffed  Potatoes 

Spaghetti  with  Cheese 

Lentil  and   Nut  Salad 

*Orange  Puffs,  Orange  Sauce 

Coffee 

*qrange  Puffs— Beat  ^  cup  Crisco 
with  ^  cup  sugar,  add  2  well-beaten 
eggs,  ^  cup  milk,  2  cups  flour,  K 
teaspoon  salt,  2  teaspoons  baking 
powder,  and  1  teaspoon  orange 
extract.  Bake  in  Criscoed  and  floured 
gem  pans  and  serve  hot  with  orange 
sauce. 

For  sauce.  Mix  K  cup  sugar  with 
2  tablespoons  cornstarch,  and  >4'  tea- 
spoon salt.  Add  1  cup  boiling  water 
and  boil  eight  minutes,  add  grated 
rinds  and  strained  juice  2  oranges 
and  3  tablespoons  Crisco. 

October  7 

Carrot  Soup 
*  Indian  Dry  Curry 
Boiled  Rice  Spinach 

Cabbage  Salad 
Pineapple,  Bavarian  Cream 
Coffee 
*Indian  Dry  Curry — 2  pounds  beef,  4 
tablespoons  Crisco,  1  onion,  2  table- 
spoons    curry     powder,     2     chopped 
gherkins,     1     dessertspoon     chutney, 
1  saltspoon  salt,  juice  of  >^  a  lemon, 
and    }4    pint    thin    brown    sauce    or 
gravy. 

Melt  Crisco  in  stewpan,  put  in 
onion  (sliced),  and  fry  for  a  few 
minutes.  Then  add  meat,  cut  in 
small  pieces,  and  fry  all  together  for 
about  10  minutes.  Now  sprinkle 
curry  over  meat,  and  stir  contents  of 
saucepan  over  fire  for  another  5 
minutes.  The  gherkins,  chutney  and 
salt  must  now  be  added;  also  sauce 
or  gravy;  and  stewpan  must  be 
set  over  very  slow  fire  about  1  hour; 
by  that  time  meat  should  be  quite 
tender.  Add  lemon  juice,  and  dish 
up.     Serve  with   plainly  boiled   rice. 


213 


October  8 

*Fried  Chicken,  Swiss  Style 
Sweet  Corn  Croquettes 
Broiled  Tomatoes 
Crab  Salad 
Crackers  Cheese 

Coffee 
*Fried  Chicken,  Swiss  Style— CooV. 
chicken  in  salted  water  till  it  is  fairly 
tender.  Take  up,  let  get  cool,  and 
cut  into  neat  pieces  for  frying. 
Sprinkle  these  pieces  with  salt,  pepper, 
and  onion  juice,  then  moisten  them 
well  with  melted  Crisco.  Let  them 
stand  1  or  2  hours  to  absorb  flavoring 
of  dressing,  then  dip  in  batter  and 
drop  into  hot  Crisco  to  cook  till 
brown.  This  batter  make  of  1  cup 
flour,  as  much  milk  as  is  needed  to 
have  it  stifle,  2  eggs,  whites  and  yolks 
beaten  separately,  and  K  cup  brandy. 
This  batter  will  be  better  for  stand- 
ing, after  it  is  mixed,  for  1  hour. 

October  9 

Roast  Shoulder  of  Feal 
Roasted  Potatoes  Lima  Beans 

Pickled  Plums 
Romaine  Salad 
*  Raisin  Batter  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Raisin  Baiter   Pudding — Beat   up  3 
eggs,  sift  in  2  cups  flour  and  K  tea- 
spoon salt,  add  1  tablesnoon  Crisco, 
1     cup     cream,     and     beat     for     8 
minutes;  then  add  1  teaspoon  baking 
powder   and    1    teaspoon   orange   ex- 
tract.    Pour  into  a  Criscoed  casserole, 
sprinkle    over    8  tablespoons  sultana 
raisins,   and  bake   in  moderate  oven 
1  hour.    Serve  with  maple  syrup.  ' 

October  10 

*Cream  of  Corn,  a  la  Creole 
Scalloped  fish  and  Oysters 

Potato  Croquettes 
Cauliflower  and  Beet  Salad 
Squash  Pie       Coffee 
*Cream  of  Corn,   a  la  Creole — Put   1 
can   of  corn   through   meat   chopper, 
add   1   large  onion,  sliced,   1  sprig  of 
parsley,  and  1  pint  of  water. 


A  Calendar  of  Dinvers 


Cook  altogether  20  minutes,  being 
careful  not  to  let  it  scorch,  then  press 
through  a  fine  sieve,  extracting  all 
pulp  possible.  Melt  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  add  an  equal  amount  of 
sifted  flour,  }4  teaspoon  salt,  and 
dash  of  pepper.  Cook  to  smooth 
paste;  then  add,  very  gradually,  1 
quart  scalded  milk.  When  thick  and 
smooth,  add  corn  pulp  and  juice  and 
1  tablespoon  sugar.  Add  salt  to 
taste,  and  just  before  serving  add  1 
cup  scalded  cream  or  very  rich  milk. 

October  11 

Roast  Veal 

Mashed  Sweet  Potatoes 

Green  Beans 

Stuffed  Beet  Salad 

Cheese  Crackers 

^Dominion  Apple  Cake 

Coffee 

*Dominion  Apple  Cake — 2  cups  flour,  1 

teaspoon    salt,    3    teaspoons    baking 

powder,   1   cup   milk,   2   eggs,   and   3 

tablespoons     melted     Crisco.       Mix 

and  sift  dry  ingredients.    Add  beaten 

yolks,    Crisco   and    milk.    Beat   well; 

cut  and  fold  in  stiffly  beaten  whites. 

Spread  mixture  ^  inch  thick  on  Cris- 

coed     pans.       Lay    apples    cut    into 

eighths  in  2  rows  on  top  of  dough. 

Sprinkle    with    sugar;    bake    in    hot 

oven  30  minutes.     Serve  with  lemon 

sauce. 

October  12 

Cream  of  Carrot  Soup 
Roast  Pig,  Apple  Sauce 
Candied  Sweet  Potatoes      ^ 
Creamed  Celery 
Kumquat  Salad 
*Cheese  Croutons 
Coffee 
*Cheese    Croutons — Cut    crusts    from 
thin  slices  of  stale  bread  and  spread 
lightly    with    creamed    Crisco,    then 
with  a  layer  of  cream  cheese  seasoned 
with  salt  and  pepper.     Cover  with  a 
second  slice  of  bread  and  cut  into  fin- 
gers   1     inch    wide,    using    a    sharp 
knife.     Place  in  a  shallow  pan  and 
brown  in  a  hot  oven. 


October  13 

*  Peanut  Puree 

Roast  Pig  Reheated  in  Casserole 

Squash 

Baked  Potatoes 

Red  Cabbage  Salad 

Sultana  Roll 

Coffee 

*Peanut  Puree — 1  cup  peanut  butter, 

1   quart   milk,    1    tablespoon   Crisco, 

1  teaspoon  onion  juice,  1  tablespoon 

cornstarch,  1  baj'  leaf,  1  blade  mace, 

pepper  and  salt  to  taste.     Put  milk, 

Crisco,    peanut    butter,    onion   juice, 

pepper,  bay   leaf  and   blade  mace  in 

double  boiler;  stir  and  cook  until  hot. 

Moisten  cornstarch  in  little  cold  milk 

and   add   it   to   hot   milk;   stir   until 

smooth    and    thick;    strain    through 

sieve.     Add   salt   and   serve   at   once 

with  croutons. 

October  14 

*Grilled  Halibut  with  Parmesan 
Roast  Mutton,  Currant  Jelly  Sauce 
Creamed  Turnips 
Browned  Sweet  Potatoes 
American  Salad 
Apple  and  Prune  Pie 
Coffee 
*Grilled     Halibut     with     Parmesan — 
Take    desired    number    of    fillets    of 
halibut  and  grill  on  both  sides  until 
nicely  browned.     Take  from  broiler, 
spread     with      Crisco,      cover     with 
grated  Parmesan  cheese,  season  with 
salt    and    dash    of   paprika    on    each 
slice,     and    set    in    hot    oven    until 
cheese  is  well  browned   and   melted. 
Serve  with   lemon  slices  and    potato 
balls    tossed    in    melted    Crisco    con- 
taining chopped   parsley. 

October  15 

*Br oiled  Smelts 

Roasted  Squabs 

Oyster  Plant,  Italian  Style 

Oriental  Salad 

Sweet  Cider  Jelly 

Coffee 

*BroiledSmelrs—S>e\ect  12  large  smelts, 

clean  well  and  split.     Chop  12  olives, 

}4  green  pepper  with  seeds  removed. 


214 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


2  sprigs  parsley,  add  yi  tablespoon 
Crisco.  Spread  paste  inside  each 
smelt.  Close  fish  together,  sprinkle 
with  salt,  moisten  with  melted  Crisco 
and  broil  over  clear  fire. 

October  16 

Polled  Fowl,  Cranberry  Sauce 

Mashed  Potatoes 

Cauliflower  au  Gratin 

Tomato  and  Green  Pepper  Salad 
Macaroon  Custard  *Queen  Cakes 

Coffee 
*Queen  Cakes — >^  cup  sugar,  }4  cup 
Crisco,  H  teaspoon  salt,  3  eggs,  }4 
cup  currants,  }4  cup  glace  cherries 
(cut  in  dice),  grate  nutmeg,  thin 
rind  ^2  lemon  (chopped  finely), 
juice  1  lemon,  1  cup  flour,  4  table- 
spoons rice  flour,  and  1  teaspoon 
baking  powder.  Put  Crisco  and  sugar 
in  basin  and  work  with  wooden  spoon 
to  cream,  add  salt  and  eggs  1  by 
1,    and    beat    mixture    thoroughly. 

Mix  in  separate  basin  fruit,  lemon 
rind,  flours  and  baking  powder.  Stir 
this  into  other  mixture,  add  nutmeg, 
and  strained  lemon  juice.  Stir  mix- 
ture several  minutes  longer.  Have 
ready  Criscoed  gem  tins,  three-parts 
fill  them  with  mixture  and  bake  in 
fairly  hot  oven  from  20  to  25  min- 
utes. Unmold  cakes  and  place  on 
sieve  to  cool.  Cakes  may  be  coated 
with   chocolate   or   boiled   frosting. 

October  17 

Baked  Veal  Cutlet 
Potatoes  Scalloped  with  Green  Peppers 
Succotash 
Spinach  Salad 
*  Apple  Pie,  Whipped  Cream 
Coffee 
*Apple   Pie — Core,   peel   and   cut  in 
halves  8  tart  apples.     Line  pie  plate 
with    Crisco    pastry,    and    fill    with 
apples;   sprinkle   over   3    tablespoons 
sugar,   }4   teaspoonful   cinnamon,   or 
nutmeg    and    cloves,    and    2    table- 
spoons Crisco  in  small  pieces.     Bake 
till  apples  are  soft,  then,  at  the  last 
moment  cover  with  1  cupful  whipped 
cream,  and  send  to  table. 


October  18 

Rice  Soup 

Fish  Pudding 

Cauliflower 

*Savory  Potatoes 

Cheese  Custard 

Apple  Dumplings 

Coffee 

*Savory  Potatoes — Pare  10  large  pota- 
toes and  slice  them,  add  1  chopped 
onion.  Crisco  pudding  dish,  put 
in  potatoes  and  onion,  sprinkle  with 
salt  and  pepper,  1  teaspoon  sage  and 
dot  with  Crisco,  add  1  cup  water 
and  bake  for  1^  hours. 

October  19 

Lamb  Cutlets,  Morland  Style 

*  Artichokes 

Riced  Potatoes 

Celery  Salad 

Crackers  Cheese 

Peach  Melba 

Coffee 

*Artichokes — Select  some  small  arti- 
chokes, trim  them  and  put  in  earth- 
enware stewpan  containing  some 
hot  Crisco.  Season  with  salt  and 
pepper  and  cover  stewpan,  leaving  to 
cook  for  about  10  minutes.  Then  add 
for  each  1  dozen  artichokes,  1  pint 
canned  peas  and  1  shredded  lettuce. 
Cover  once  more  and  cook  gently 
without  moistening,  the  moisture  of 
lettuce  and  peas  sufficing. 

October  20 

Canteloupes 

Young  Chickens,  Roasted 

Stuffed  Tomatoes 

*Grilled  Potatoes- 

Apple  and  Nut  Salad 

Fruit  Cup 

Coffee 

*Grilled  Potatoes — Cut  cold  boiled 
potatoes  into  y^  inch  slices  length- 
ways, dip  in  melted  Crisco,  sprinkle 
with  chopped  olives,  pour  over  a 
little  melted  Crisco  and  send  to 
table. 


215 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


October  21 

*Giblet  Soup 
Spiced  Shoulder  0/  Mutton 
Brussels  Sprouts      Mashed  Potatoes 
Prune  Mold  Coffee 

*Giblet  Soup — Scald  and  cut  up  1 
set  of  giblets — these  include  the  neck, 
gizzard,  liver,  and  heart  of  any  fowl, 
put  them  into  a  pan  with  1  quart 
stock  or  water,  1  whole  onion  stuck 
with  cloves,  and  the  grated  rind  of 
}4  a  lemon.  Simmer  for  "3  hours 
and  strain.  Peel  and  slice  2  onions 
and  fry  them  in  3  tablespoons  melted 
Crisco  when  brown,  stir  in  1  table- 
spoon flour  and  fry  it  brown,  add 
the  stock  and  stir  till  boiling,  put 
back  the  giblets,  season  with  salt 
and  pepper,  1  grated  carrot  and 
simmer  for  30  minutes. 

October  22 

*Okra  Soup 
Curried  Mutton 
Rice  Stewed  Celery  with  Egg  Sauce 

Asparagus  Salad  Pear  Fritters 

Coffee 
*Okra  Soup — Cut  into  pieces  2^ 
cups  okra,  slice  1  onion,  slice  1  carrot, 
slice  1  turnip,  three  tomatoes  skinned 
and  sliced,  1  cup  beans,  1  can  peas, 
dice  2  stalks  celery  and  chop  3  table- 
spoons parsley. 

Melt  3  tablespoons  Crisco  in  a 
saucepan,  add  onion,  carrot,  turnip, 
beans,  and  cook  15  minutes,  add 
okra,  celery,  and  5  cups  water, 
cook  slowly  for  Ij^  hours,  add 
seasoning  of  salt,  pepper  and  red 
pepper,  tomatoes,  corn  and  peas  and 
simmer  for  40  minutes.  If  too 
thick,  thin  with  stock.    Serve  hot. 

October  23 

*  Haricot  of  Veal 
Baked  Tomatoes      Russian  Fish  Salad 
Date  Souffle 
Coffee 
"Haricot  of  Veal — Cut  2  pounds  fillet 
of  veal  into  small   pieces  of  uniform 
shape   and   size,   and   fry  till   a  light 
brown  in  hot  Crisco.     Add  2  table- 
spoons   flour   blended    with    2    table- 
spoons  melted    Crisco.    Season  with 


salt  and  pepper,  cover  with  1  pint 
stock  or  water,  and  let  simmer,  cov- 
ered closely,  till  veal  is  done  and  till 
stock  is  well  cooked  away.  Take  up, 
arrange  in  circle  on  dish,  and  in  cen- 
ter put  Lima  beans,  boiled  and  re- 
heated in  plenty  of  Crisco. 

October  24 

Roast  Pork,  Apple  Sauce 

Browned  Parsnips 

Glazed  Sweet  Potatoes    Porcupine  Salad 

*Black  Cap  Pudding  Coffee 
*Black  Cap  Pudding — Mix  }4  cup 
currants,  with  3  tablespoons  sugar, 
yi  teaspoon  salt,  1  }4  cups  flour  sifted 
with  1  teaspoon  baking  powder,  yi 
teaspoon  grated  nutmeg,  2  table- 
spoons Crisco,  2  well  beaten  eggs,  and 
2  cupfuls  milk,  and  beat  well  to- 
gether. Crisco  a  pudding  mold, 
sprinkle  in  some  currants,  pour  in 
mixture,  cover  with  greased  paper  and 
steam  for  2  hours.     Serve  with  milk. 

October  25 

JVild  Duck  with  Mushrooms 

"Stuffed  Egg  Plant 
Apple  and  Cucumber  Salad 

Almond  Pudding 
Hot  Cheese  Denises  Coffee 
"Stuffed  Egg  P/a«/— Parboil  1  egg 
plant  and  cut  in  halves.  Scrape  out 
some  of  the  inside  and  chop  some 
cold  cooked  meat  with  2  tomatoes, 
1  onion,  and  2  green  peppers.  Then 
mix  with  1  beaten  egg,  1  tablespoon 
Crisco,  and  salt  and  pepper  to  taste. 
Fill  halves  with  this  mixture;  sprinkle 
with  breadcrumbs  and  tiny  bits  of 
Crisco,  put  in  baking  dish  with  little 
stock  or  water,  and  bake. 

October  26 

Afock  Pigeon,  Espagnole  Sauce 

"Scalloped  Pumpkin  and  Rice 

Baked  Sweet  Potatoes 

Combination  Salad 

Honeycomb  Pudding 

Coffee 

"Scalloped    Pumpkin    and     Rice — In 

Criscoed  fireproof  dish  arrange  layer 

of    stewed     pumpkin,     cover     with 


216 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


layer  of  boiled  rice,  then  layer  of 
white  sauce,  proceed  until  ingred- 
ients are  used.  Cover  with  crumbs, 
dot  with  Crisco  and  bake  until 
browned  on  top.  To  cook  pumpkin, 
cut  in  two,  scrape  out  the  interior, 
pare  and  cut  into  small  pieces. 
Steam  and  cook  till  tender.  Rub 
through  a  sieve,  add  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  season  with  salt,  pepper,  and 
paprika. 

October  27 

Noisettes  of  Mutton 
String  Beans  Latticed  Potatoes 

French  Salad  *Chestnut  Dainty 
Coffee 
*Chestnut  Dainty — Boil  1  pound  of 
Italian  chestnuts  15  minutes;  then 
remove  shells  and  skins,  and  put 
back  to  boil  until  tender,  with  1  cup 
of  milk  and  1  teaspoon  Crisco,  on  the 
back  part  of  range  until  soft  enough 
to  rub  through  a  sieve.  Crisco  a 
mold  well  and  line  thickly  with  pulp, 
then  add  layer  of  apple  sauce  colored 
pink  with  currant  jelly;  then  another 
layer  chestnuts  and  again  a  layer  of 
apple  sauce.  Over  this  squeeze  some 
lemon  juice,  and  bake  in  quick  oven. 
Turn  out  on  platter,  and  surround 
with  whipped  cream,  colored  with 
little  currant  jelly. 

October  28 

Shrimp  Canapes 
Roast  Mutton,  Onion  Sauce 
*Celeriac  Sweet  Potatoes 

Corn  Salad  Pumpkin  Pie 
Coffee 
*Celeriac — Well  wash  and  peel  the 
celeriac.  Cut  them  in  quarters  and 
boil  in  boiling  salted  water  until 
quite  tender.  Drain  well  and  ar- 
range in  a  hot  dish  and  pour  egg 
sauce  over  them. 

For  egg  sauce,  blend  2  tablespoons 
Crisco  with  2  tablespoons  flour,  add 
1  cup  milk  and  stir  till  boiling,  add 
seasoning  of  salt  and  pepper  and 
boil  for  8  minutes,  stirring  all  the 
time,  then  add  2  hard-cooked  eggs 
rubbed  through  a  sieve,  mix  well  and 
serve. 


October  29 

Cream  of  Spinach  Soup 
Baked  fVhite  Fish,  Caper  Sauce 
Rice  Croquettes  String  Beans 

Celery  Boiled  Dressing 

*Chestnut  Tartlets  Coffee 
*Chestnut  Tartlets — Boil  and  mash  1 
pint  chestnuts,  add  j^  cup  each 
creamed  Crisco  and  cream,  I  beaten 
yolk,  yi  cup  powdered  sugar,  little 
salt,  and  \}4  cups  milk.  Cover  in- 
verted small  tartlet  tins  with  Crisco 
pastry,  bake,  and  fill  with  mixture, 
and  bake  again. 

October  30 

Brussels  Sprout  Soup 

*  Rabbit,  a  la  Marengo 

Parisian  Potatoes        Braised  Celery 

Lettuce,  French  Dressing 

Prune  and  Rice  Meringues 

Coffee 

*  Rabbit,  a  la    Marengo — Cut     up    1 

rabbit  into  neat  joints.     Melt  }4  cup 

Crisco  in  saucepan,  put  in  rabbit  and 

fry   it    quickly    till   browned,    add  2 

chopped  small  onions,  and  fry  for  a 

few   minutes,  pour  oflF    any  fat  into 

another   pan,    add    to    rabbit    1    cup 

brown  sauce,  2  chopped  tomatoes,  8 

button  mushrooms,  seasoning  of  salt, 

pepper,  and  paprika.     Put  on  lid  and 

simmer  gently  1   hour.    Arrange  rab- 

Wit   on   hot  dish,   put    mushrooms  in 

heaps  round  with  thin  lemon  slices, 

season  gravy  and  pour  it  over. 

October  31 

Clear  Soup 
*Braised  Duck  with  Turnips 
Riced  Potatoes  Spinach 

Orange  Salad 
Goblin  Cakes  Nuts  Candies 

Custard  Souffle,  Vanilla  Sauce 
Coffee 
*Braised  Duck  with  Turnips — Wash 
and  cut  2  carrots,  2  stalks  celery,  2 
turnips,  1  onion  in  large  pieces,  put 
them  in  pan  on  these  place  4  slices 
ham,  then  1  duck  trussed  for  roast- 
ing, 1  bunch  parsley,  2  cups  water, 
dust  nutmeg,  pepper,  and  salt.    Lay 


217 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Criscoed  paper  over  top,  then  lid, 
and  simmer  1  hour  or  till  duck  is  ten- 
der. 

Melt  3  tablespoons  Crisco  in  a 
pan,  add  1  dozen  small  peeled  tur- 
nips and  toss  till  they  are  golden 
color.  When  duck  is  cooked,  remove 
strings  and  skewers.  Put  on  hot  dish, 
and  arrange  turnips  round.  Season 
gravy  and  strain  over  duck. 

November  1 

Irish  Stew  Baked  Rice  Lima  Beans 
Macedoine  Salad 
*ChocolaU  Cream  Pie  Coffee 
*Ckocolate  Cream  Pie — 2  squares 
chocolate,  }4  cup  cornstarch,  1  tea- 
spoon Crisco,  1  pint  milk,  2  egg 
whites,  j/2  cup  sugar,  3  egg  yolks,  }4 
teaspoon  salt,  and  1  tablespoon 
vanilla.  Melt  chocolate,  add  sugar, 
cornstarch,  egg  yolks,  salt,  Crisco 
and  milk.  Cook  in  double  boiler  till 
thick,  stirring  constantly;  flavor  with 
vanilla.  Pour  into  a  baked  pie 
crust  shell,  cover  with  meringue 
made  by  beating  egg  whites  till  stiff 
and  adding  2  tablespoons  sugar; 
brown  in  oven  and  serve  cold. 

November  2 

Baked  Rolled  fillets  of  Fish,  Bechamel 

Sauce 

Cucumber  Salad      Yeast  Rolls 

*  Roast  Guinea  Chickens,  Guava  Jelly, 

Rice  Croquettes        Scalloped  Egg  Plant 

Pear  and  Celery  Salad 

Lemon  Sherbet  Sponge  Cake 

Coffee 
*  Roast  Guinea  Chickens — Put  2  table- 
spoons Crisco  in  each  of  the  birds, 
this  prevents  them  getting  dry.  Slit 
2  slices  bacon  once  or  twice  then  tie 
over  breasts  of  birds,  which  should 
he  trussed  for  roasting.  Wrap  them 
in  Criscoed  paper  and  bake  in  a 
quick  oven  for  30  minutes,  baste 
well  and  frequently;  for  the  last  8 
minutes  remove  paper  and  bacon; 
sprinkle  with  a  little  flour,  salt  and 
pepper,  baste  well,  and  let  brown. 
Serve  on  hot  dish,  garnished  with  rolls 
of  bacon.  Hand  with  it  gravy,  bread 
sauce,  and  guava  jelly. 


November  3 

Celery  Soup 
*Casserole  of  Lamb 
Sweet  Pickle 
Qreamed  Onions 

Mashed  Potatoes 
Cabbage  Salad 
Caramel  Ice  Cream 
Coffee 

*Casserole  of  Lamb — lyi  pounds  loin 
of  lamb,  }^  cup  rice,  2  cups  good 
gravy,  1  blade  mace,  K  cup  Crisco,  2 
egg  yolks,  salt  and  pepper,  and  a 
little  grated  nutmeg.  Half  roast  loin 
of  lamb,  and  cut  it  into  steaks.  Boil 
rice  in  boiling  salted  water  for  10 
minutes,  drain  it,  and  add  to  it 
gravy  with  nutmeg  and  mace;  cook 
slowly  until  rice  begins  to  thicken, 
remove  it  from  fire,  stir  in  Crisco, 
and  when  melted  add  yolks  of  eggs 
well  beaten;  Crisco  a  casserole  well, 
sprinkle  steaks  with  salt  and  pepper, 
dip  them  in  melted  Crisco,  and  lay 
them  in  Criscoed  dish;  pour  over 
gravy  that  comes  from  them,  add 
rice  and  simmer  for  }4  an  hour. 

November  4 

Tomato  Soup 

*Steamed  Cod,  Parsley  Sauce 

Roast  Ribs  of  Beef ,  Horseradish  Sauce 

Colcannon  Potatoes 

Charlotte  Russe 

Coffee 

*Steamed  Cod — Wipe  4  cod  steaks  dry, 
and  sprinkle  with  salt,  pepper,  lemon 
juice,  and  melted  Crisco  on  under 
side;  lay  on  Criscoed  platter,  put 
another  Criscoed  platter  over;  set 
on  top  of  saucepan  of  boiling  water, 
and  steam  ^  of  an  hour,  or  until 
fish  begins  to  leave  bones.  Serve  with 
parsley  sauce. 

For  parsley  sauce.  Blend  2  table- 
spoons Crisco  with  2  tablespoons 
flour  in  a  pan  over  the  fire,  add  1  cup 
milk  and  stir  till  boiling,  season  with 
salt,  pepper  and  red  pepper,  and 
stir  and  cook  for  10  minutes,  then 
add  1  tablespoon  chopped  parsley, 
and  serve.     . 


218 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


November  5 

Ham  Timbales,  Cheese  Sauce 

Paprika  Potatoes  Spinach 

Apple  and  Celery  Salad 

*Cocoanut  Pudding 

Coffee, 

*Cocoanut    Pudding — 1    cup    scalded 

milk,    }i  cup    soft    breadcrumbs,    }4 

cup  grated  cocoanut,  2  egg  yolks,  1 

tablespoon  Crisco,   ^2   cup  cocoa,  ^ 

cup   sugar,   1   teaspoon   lemon  juice, 

2  egg  whites,  and  X  teaspoon  salt. 

Soak  bread  in  scalded  milk  until 
soft.  Add  cocoanut,  sugar,  cocoa, 
Crisco,  lemon  juice  and  salt;  beat 
well;  add  yolks  eggs  beaten,  cut  and 
fold  in  stiffly-beaten  whites.  Turn 
into  Criscoed  pudding  dish  and  bake 
in  moderate  oven  30  minutes.  Serve 
hot  or  cold. 

November  6 

Roast  Duck 
Egg  Plant  Croquettes 
Peppers  Stuffed  with  Rice 
Canned  Pears  on  Lettuce,  with 
Mayonnaise 
*Brown  Bread  Souffle 
Coffee 
*Brown  Bread  Souffle— Melt  2}4  table- 
spoons Crisco,   add   }4  cup  milk,  >^ 
cup    cream,    2   .cups    brown    bread- 
crumbs, l^  teaspoon  salt,  and  grated 
rind    1    lemon;    let    boil    2    minutes, 
stirring  well,  remove   pan  from  fire, 
add  4  tablespoons  sugar,  1  teaspoon 
cinnamon,  1  teaspoon  vanilla  extract, 
and  when  cool,  beaten  yolks  4  eggs. 
Beat  egg  whites  stiffly  and  add  them 
lightly.      Pour  mixture  into  Criscoed 
tin,    cover   with  Criscoed   paper  and 
steam  gently  1  hour.    Serve  hot  with 
sweet  sauce. 

November  7 

Corned   Beef 
*Cabbage,  a  la  Creme       Potatoes 
Olive  Salad 
Hasty  Pudding 

Cocoanut  Cakes 

Coffee 

*Cabbage,  a  la  Creme — Trim  and  wash 

1     cabbage,     then     boil     in     boiling 

salted  water,  adding  1   peeled  onion 


stuck  with  2  cloves.  When  tender 
take  out  onion  and  drain  cabbage. 
Either  chop  finely  or  rub  through 
a  sieve.  Melt  1  tablespoon  Crisco 
in  pan,  put  in  cabbage,  stir  it  well, 
add  3  tablespoons  cream  gradually, 
salt  and  pepper  to  taste. 

When  thoroughly  hot,  pile  in  hot 
dish,  and  garnish  with  sippets  fried 
bread  or  toast. 

November  8 

Cold  Corned  Beef 

Baked  Potatoes 

Pickled  Beets 

Cauliflower  Salad 
Cheese  Wafers 

*Golden  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Golden  Pudding — Line  and  ornament 
small  pudding  dish  with  puff  pastry. 
Beat  2  tablespoons  Crisco  with  4 
tablespoons  sugar  till  creamy,  add 
4  tablespoons  cakecrumbs,  yolks 
3  eggs  beaten  with  >^  cup  milk, 
J4  teaspoon  salt,  grated  rind  and 
strained  juice  2  oranges.  Pour  into 
pudding  dish,  and  bake  40  minutes. 
Whip  up  egg  whites  to  stiff  froth, 
stir  in  3  tablespoons  sugar,  few  drops 
yellow  color,  1  teaspoon  orange 
extract,  and  pile  on  top  of  pudding. 
Put  back  in  oven  to  brown. 

November  9 

Broiled  Steak 

Mashed  Potatoes 

Spinach  with  Butter  Sauce 

Escarole  Salad 

*Cheese  Fondue 

Coffee 

*Cheese  Fondue — 2  tablespoons  flour, 

>^   cup   grated   cheese,   1   tablespoon 

Crisco,  2  eggs,  salt,  pepper  and  red 

pepper,    and     yi    cup    milk.       Melt 

Crisco,  add  flour,  then  milk  gradually 

Stir  till  they  boil,  cool  a  little,  add 

cheese    and    yolks    and    seasonings. 

Fold  in  whites  stiffly  beaten.     Pour 

into  a  Criscoed  souffle  tin.     Bake  20 

minutes  in  hot  oven.     Fold  a  napkin 

round  and  serve  hot. 


219 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


November  10 

Haddock  au  Gratin 
*Fenison  Cutlets 
Hashed  Browned  Potatoes 

Oyster  and  Celery  Salad 
Marrons,  a  la  Creme 
Cofee 
*Venison  Cutlets — Trim  venison  cut- 
lets in  usual  way.     Put  4  tablespoons 
Crisco  in   saute   pan   and   when   hot 
put    in    cutlets,    seasoned    with    salt 
and    pepper,   fry   till   brown.      Then 
take    out    cutlets,    put    into    pan    ^ 
tumbler  currant    jelly  to   melt,    add 
2  tablespoons  Crisco  with  ]4  teaspoon 
salt,  and  serve  separately  with  cutlets. 

November  11 

*Baked  Scallops  in  Shells 
Chicken  Souffle 
Fried  Celery  Latticed  Potatoes 

Watercress  and  Green  Pepper  Salad 
Meringues  Glaces  Coffee 

*Baked  Scallops  in  Shells— Take  de- 
sired quantity  of  fresh  scallops — 
1  pint  or  1  quart,  and  cook  them  in 
little  white  wine  until  done.  Drain, 
cut  in  quarters,  and  add  to  them  }4 
their  quantity  of  minced  onion 
fried  until  tender,  but  not  brown. 
Moisten  with  white  sauce,  season 
with  red  pepper  and  salt,  heap  high 
in  scallop  shells,  cover  with  bread* 
crumbs  moistened  in  melted  Crisco, 
and  brown  in  hot  oven  Garnish 
with  lemon  slices  and  parsley. 

November  12 

Hamburg  Steak  Balls 
Mashed  Pqtatoes  Fried  Parsnips 

Apple  and  Celery  Salad 

*Baked  Indian  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Baked  Indian  Pudding — 3>^  quarts 
milk,  3  tablespoons  cornmeal,  }4 
pint  molasses,  3  tablespoons  Crisco, 
1  teaspoon  salt,  1  teaspoon  cinnamon, 
and  ^  teaspoon  ginger.  Boil  1 
quart  milk;  add  to  it  molasses, 
Crisco,  salt,  and  spices,  and  lastly 
meal  stirred  smooth  with  little  cold 
milk;  scald  whole  together,  and  turn 
into    a    well    Criscoed    baking    dish. 


When  it  begins  to  crust  over,  stir 
it  all  up  from  bottom,  and  add  1  pint 
of  cold  milk.  Repeat  process  every 
^2  hour,  or  oftener  if  pudding  browns 
too  fast,  till  5  pints  are  used;  then 
let  it  bake  till  done — 6  hours  in  all. 
Serve  hot  with  sauce  of  grated  or 
granulated  maple  sugar  stirred  into 
rich  cream,  and  kept  very  cold  till 
needed. 

November  13 

Lamb  Cutlets 
Potatoes         *Curried  Lima  Beans 
Tomato  Salad 

Cheese  Fritters 
.     Benedictine  Jelly 
Coffee 
*Curried  Lima  Beans — Chop  1  onion 
finely   and  fry  it  for  a  few  minutes 
in  2  tablespoons  Crisco,  add  1  table- 
spoon curry  powder,  1  teaspoon  salt, 
1   teaspoon   flour,    1   teaspoon  lemon 
juice,  and  1  cup  water,  allow  to  cook 
slowly  for  20  minutes,  then  add  IH 
cups    cooked    lima    beans,    mix    well 
and  serve  hot. 

November  14 

Cream  of  Tomato  Soup 

*  Nut  Roast,  Piquante  Sauce 

Sweet  Potatoes  Fried  Egg  Plant 

Lettuce  Salad 

Baked  Quinces       Gingerbread  

Coffee 
*  Nut  Roast — yi  cup  lentils,  }4  cup 
shelled  roasted  peanuts,  yi  table- 
spoon Crisco,  ^2  cup  toasted  bread- 
crumbs, ^2  teaspoon  salt,  ^  salt- 
spoon  pepper  and  milk.  Soak 
lentils  over  night;  in  morning  drain, 
cover  with  fresh  water  and  bring 
to  boil.  Drain  again;  and  put  in 
fresh  water  and  cook  until  tender. 
Drain  once  more;  throw  away  water 
and  press  lentils  through  colander. 
Add  nuts,  either  ground  or  chopped, 
Crisco,  breadcrumbs,  seasoning  and 
milk  sufficient  to  make  mixture  con- 
sistency of  mush.  Put  into  Criscoed 
baking  dish;  bake  in  moderate  oven  1 
hour;  turn  out  on  heated  platter; 
garnish  with  parsley  or  watercress 
and  serve  with  Piquante  sauce. 


220 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


Vegetarian 
November  15 

Sweet  Potatoes  au  Gratin 

Corn,  a  la  Southern 

*  Raisin  and  Nut  Bread 

Apples  Stuffed  with  Celery 

Caramel  Custards  Coffee 

*Raisin   and    Nut  Bread — 1    egg,    }i 

cup  sugar,  \}4  cups  milk,  1  teaspoon 

salt,  3  cups  flour,  2  teaspoons  baking 

powder,  2  tablespoons  Crisco,  }4  cup 

raisins,  and    1    cup   chopped  walnut 

meats.     Beat    egg   with   sugar;    add 

sifted  flour,  baking  powder  and  salt 

alternately  with  milk;  last  add  Crisco, 

melted,  and  walnuts.     Bake  in  deep 

pan  in  slow  oven  45  minutes. 

November  16 

Cream  of  Corn  Soup 
Roast  Turkey,  Giblet  Sauce 
Mashed  Potatoes  Creamed  Onions 

Melon  Mangoes        Cheese  Fingers 
*  Apple  Strudel  Coffee 

*  Apple  Strudel — Sift  2  cups  flour  with 
K  teaspoonful  salt  and  1  teaspoon 
sugar.  Add  gradually  1  cup  luke- 
warm water,  and  knead  until  dough 
does  not  stick  to  hands.  Roll  dough 
as  thin  as  possible  on  floured  board. 
Place  clean  tablecloth  on  table,  put 
rolled  out  dough  on  it  and  pull  care- 
fully with  fingers  to  get  thin  as  pos- 
sible.- Mix  4  cups  chopped  apples 
with  1  cup  sugar,  1  tablespoon  cin- 
namon, 1  cup  seeded  raisins,  and  1 
cup  currants.  Spread  over  dough, 
and  spread  little  Crisco  over  apples. 
Take  cloth  in  both  hands,  and  roll 
strudel  over  and  over  like  roly  poly. 
Roll  strudel  into  Criscoed  balcing  pan 
and  bake  in  hot  oven  until  brown. 

November  17 

*Stewed  Rabbit 

Glace  Potatoes  Baked  Onions 

Jellied  Baked  Beans 

Cranberry  Bavarian  Cream 

Coffee 

*Stewed  Rabbit — Melt  4  tablespoons 

Crisco    in     saucepan;     joint     rabbit 

and  fry  quickly  in  Crisco,  then  fry   1 

sliced    onion    until   browned,  stir"  in 


2  tablespoons  flour  and  brown  flour; 
now  add  gradually  2  cups  water  and 
stir  till  smooth,  when  boiling  add  salt, 
pepper,  and  paprika  to  taste,  and  2 
tablespoons  chopped  parsley;  simmer 
slowly  \yi  hours.  Dish  and  strain 
over  gravy, 

November  18 

Julienne  Soup  Toast  Points 

Stuffed  Hearts  Pickles 

Browned  Potatoes  Baked  Squash 

*  Almond  and  Apple  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Almond  and  Apple  Pudding — Pare 
and  core  6  apples,  chop  into  small 
pieces  and  sprinkle  with  ^2  cup  sugar. 
Have  ready  2  cups  breadcrumbs, 
soaked  in  yi  cup  milk  to  which  1 
tablespoon  melted  Crisco  has  been 
added.  Beat  2  eggs  till  light,  add 
to  them  grating  of  nutmeg,  a  pinch 
of  cinnamon  and  good  pinch  of  salt. 
Mix  apple  with  soaked  breadcrumbs, 
then  eggs,  and  lastly2dozens  blanched 
almonds  chopped  fine.  Thin  with 
^2  cup  milk,  then  pour  into  Cris- 
coed tin  and  bake.  Serve  with  sweet- 
ened cream. 

November  19 

Spare  Ribs  Stew 

Rice  Croquettes        Waldorf  Salad 

Cheese  Biscuits 

*Cranberry  Pudding      Coffee 

*Cranherry   Pudding — Cream   }4  cup 

Crisco  with  1  cup  sugar,  add  3  eggs 

well   beaten,    }4   cup   milk,   3^4   cups 

flour,    2    teaspoons    baking    powder, 

]4    teaspoon    salt,    and    yi    teaspoon 

almond    extract,     then    stir    in     \}^ 

cups  cranberries,  turn  into  Criscoed 

mold,  cover  with  greased  paper  and 

steam  4  hours.     Serve  with  milk. 

November  20 

Oyster  Croquettes 
*Stuffed  Lamb  Chops      Chestnut  Puree 
Mashed  Potatoes     Egg  Plant  Fritters 
Kumquat  and  Endive  Salad 
Stewed  Figs         Coffee 
*Stuffed  Lamb  Chops — Wipe  6  French 
chops,   cut    lyi  inches    thick.      Split 


221 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


meat  in  halves,  cutting  to  bone. 
Cook  lyi  tablespoons  Crisco  and 
1  tablespoon  chopped  onion  5  min- 
utes; remove  onion,  add  yi  cup  chop- 
ped mushroom,  and  cook  5  minutes; 
add  2  tablespoons  flour,  3  tablespoons 
stock,  1  teaspoon  chopped  parsley,  ^ 
teaspoon  salt,  and  few  grains  red  pep- 
per. Spread  mixture  between  layers 
of  chops,  press  together  lightly,  wrap 
in  Criscoed  paper  cases,  and  broil  10 
minutes.     Serve  with  chestnut  puree. 

November  21 

Baked  Boned  White  Fish 

Bread  Dressing,  Drawn  Butter  Sauce 

Stewed  Tomatoes 

Mashed  Potatoes 

*Date  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Date    Pudding — Clean,    stone,    and 

chop    1     pound    dates,    add     1     cup 

English    walnut     meats,     broken    in 

pieces,     ^    cup     flour,     1     teaspoon 

baking    powder,     and     ^     teaspoon 

salt.      Beat  up  4  egg  whites  to  stiff 

froth,  then  fold  in  }4  cup  sugar,  add 

beaten    egg     yolks,     ^    tablespoon 

melted     Crisco    and     date     mixture. 

Turn  into  Criscoed  tin  and   bake  in 

moderate  oven  30  minutes.     Cut  in 

squares  and  serve  cold  with  whipped 

cream. 

November  22 

*Fried  Smelts,  Sauce  Tartare 
Roast   Chicken 
Creamed  Chestnuts 
Canned  Stringless  Beans 
Orange  and  Romaine  Salad 
Mint  Ice  Cream 
Coffee 
*Fried  Smelts — Clean,  trim  the  fins, 
and  remove  gills;  wipe  very  dry,  roll 
in  flour,  brush  over  with  beaten  egg, 
roll  in  crumbs  and  fry  in  hot  Crisco 
until  crisp;    drain  on  soft  paper,  dish 
on  lace  paper  in  a  heap,  and  garnish 
with  fried  parsley,  serve  with  sauce 
tartare.      Smelts    make    a    nice    gar- 
nish for  many  fish   dishes,  the  tails 
drawn  through  the  eyes,  dressed  as 
above,  and  fried. 


Novemiber  23 

Bisque  of  Clams 
Boiled  Fish,  Hollandaise  Sauce 
Potatoes       Baked  Parsnips 
Celery  Salad 
*  Italian  Fritters 
Coffee 
^Italian  Fritters — 1   egg,   1   cup  Biilk, 
grated   rind    1   lemon,   2   tablespoons 
Crisco,   5    slices    stale    cake,   yi  tea- 
spoon    powdered     cinnamon,     sugar 
and  few  grains  salt.     Cake  should  be 
about  a  >^  of  an  inch  thick,  not  less. 
Cut  out  into  oval   or  round   shapes 
with    cutter.      Beat    egg,    mix    with 
milk,    lemon    rind,    salt,    and    about 
1    teaspoon    sugar.       Lay    slices    of 
cake  in   this   custard   until   they   are 
soft,  but  not  crumbly;  time  will  de- 
pend upon  how  stale  cake  is.     Heat 
}4  Crisco  in  frying  pan,  lift  few  pieces 
of  cake  up  carefully  and  lay  them  in 
hot  Crisco.     Brown  1  side,  then  turn 
them    over    and    brown    other    side 
also.     Add  some  pieces  of  Crisco  as 
required.       Mix     cinnamon     with    2 
teaspoons   sugar    and    sprinkle   some 
of   these    over    each    fritter.      Serve 
with  hard  sauce. 

November  24 

Cannelon  of  Beef 
Creamed  Cabbage     Franconia  Potatoes 

Cranberry  Salad 
Cheese  IVafers 

*Baba  with  Syrup 
Coffee 
*Baba  with  Syrup — Sift  3  cups  flour 
and  ^2  teaspoon  salt  into  a  basin,  add 
1  yeast  cake  dissolved  in  }/2  cup  luke 
warm  milk;  make  well  in  center  of 
flour,  pour  in  5  beaten  eggs,  mix  with 
the  hand  for  5  minutes.  Put  it  into 
Criscoed  basin,  spread  over  with  J/^ 
cup  Crisco,  cover  and  put  in  warm 
place  until  it  has  risen  to  twice  its 
original  size.  Knead  until  elastic, 
add  1  tablespoon  sugar,  2  tablespoons 
currants,  2  tablespoons  sultana  rais- 
ins, knead  again.  Turn  into  large 
Criscoed  mold.  It  should  not  be 
more  than  half  full.  Allow  to  rise 
to  top  of  tin,  then  bake  in  moderate 
oven  for  30  minutes.     Turn  out  and 


222 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


pour  syrup  over  it.  To  make  syrup, 
boil  two  cups  of  water  with  X  cup 
sugar  for  10  minutes,  then  add  2 
tablespoons  apricot  jam  and  boil  5 
minutes.  Strain,  add  1  wineglass 
rum  and  bring  to  boiling  point. 

November  25 

Quick  Beef  Soup 

Panned  Chicken,  Brown  Sauce 

Curried  Rice 

Creamed  Carrots 

Tomato  Salad 

*Baked  Macaroni  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Baked  Macaroni  Pudding — 1  pint 
milk,  4  long  sticks  macaroni,  1  egg, 

2  tablespoons  sugar,  nutmeg,  1  table- 
spoon Crisco,  and  salt  to  taste. 

Break  macaroni  into  }4  inch 
lengths.  Boil  milk,  shake  in  macaroni 
and  salt  and  boil  it  very  slowly  for 
1/2  an  hour,  or  until  quite  tender, 
and  keep  it  well  stirred  during 
cooking.  Thickly  Crisco  a  pudding 
dish  and  beat  up  egg.  Add  sugar 
and  Crisco  to  macaroni,  let  it  cool  a 
little,  then  pour  in  egg  and  mix  it 
well.  Grate  little  nutmeg  on  top  and 
bate  pudding  very  slowly  until  top 
is  delicately  browned. 

November  26 

Pea  Soup 

Boiled  Tongue,  Raisin  Sauce 

Rice  Balls 

Stewed  Celery 

Tomato  and  Cress  Salad 

*Graham  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Graham  Pudding — Mix  2  cups 
graham  flour,  ^  teaspoon  salt,  2 
tablespoons  Crisco,  1  teaspoon  each 
cinnamon,  ginger,  cloves,  and  nut- 
meg, 1  cup  currants,  1  cup  molasses, 
1  egg  well  beaten,  1  cup  milk,  2  tea- 
spoons soda  dissolved  in  1  tablespoon 
hot  water.  Pour  in  Criscoed  mold, 
cover  with  Criscoed  paper  and  steam 

3  hours.  Turn  out  and  serve  with 
milk. 


November  27 

Steak  en  Casserole 

Sweet  Potato  Croquettes 

Boiled  Cauliflower 

Pear  and  Grape  Salad      Cheese  Fritters 

*Pineapple  Souffle 

Coffee 

*  Pineapple  Souffle — Cream  1)4  table- 
spoons each  Crisco  and  flour,  add 
1  cup  canned  grated  pineapple  and 
juice.  Cook  5  minutes,  remove 
from  fire,  add  little  salt,  I  table- 
spoon lemon  juice,  and  3  beaten 
egg  yolks.  Bake  in  Criscoed  dish 
20  'minutes.  Serve  with  following 
sauce:  Cook  2  tablespoons  creamed 
Crisco  in  double  boiler,  add  2  yolks 
of  egg,  1  at  a  time,  beat,  and  add 
4  tablespoons  sugar,  2  tablespoons 
orange  juice,  1  teaspoon  lemon  juice, 
and  }4  cup  whipped  cream.  Serve 
hot. 


November  28 

Mock  Bisque  Soup 
Mutton  Haricot 

String  Beans 

Fried  Parsnips 

Lettuce  and  Pepper  Salad 

*  Apples  with  Red  Currant  Jelly 

Coffee 

*Apples  with  Red  Currant  Jelly — 6 
cooking  apples,  4  tablespoons  flour, 
1  egg,  cake  crumbs,  apricot  jam,  6 
glace  cherries,  red  currant  jelly, 
Crisco  and  syrup.  Choose  apples  as 
much  as  possible  same  size,  peel  and 
core  them  carefully,  so  as  not  to 
break  them.  Put  1  cup  syrup  into 
stewpan  or  baking  tin,  put  in  apples 
and  cook  over  fire  or  in  oven  until 
nearly  done.  Baste  them  occasionally 
with  syrup.  Let  them  get  cold,  then 
roll  them  in  flour,  brush  over  with 
beaten  egg,  toss  in  sifted  cake  crumbs, 
and  fry  in  hot  Crisco  a  golden  brown. 
Drain  on  piece  of  paper,  fill  centers 
with  apricot  jam,  cut  out  some  rounds 
of  red  currant  jelly,  place  1  on  top 


223 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


November  29 

Mock  Bisque  Soup 
Mutton   Haricot 

String  Beans 

fried  Parsnips 

Lettuce  and  Pepper  Salad 

*Apples   with    Red   Currant  Jelly 

Cofee 

*Apples  with  Red  Currant  Jelly — 6 
cooking  apples,  4  tablespoons  flour, 
1  egg,  cakecrumbs,  apricot  jam,  6 
glace  cherries,  red  currant  jelly, 
Crisco  and  syrup.  Choose  apples  as 
much  as  possible  same  size,  peel  and 
core  them  carefully,  so  as  not  to 
break  them.  Put  1  cup  syrup  into 
stewpan  or  baking  tin,  put  in  apples 
and  cook  over  fire  or  in  oven  until 
nearly  done.  Baste  them  occasionally 
with  syrup.  Let  them  get  cold,  then 
roll  them  in  flour,  brush  over  with 
beaten  egg,  toss  in  sifted  cakecrumbs, 
and  fry  in  hot  Crisco  a  golden  brown. 
Drain  on  piece  of  paper,  fill  centers 
with  apricot  jam,  cut  out  some  rounds 
of  red  currant  jelly,  place  1  on  top 
of  each  apple  and  a  glace  cherry  on 
that.  Dish  up  and  serve  hot  or 
cold.  An  apricot  syrup  should  be 
sent  to  table  separately  with  apples. 


November  30 

Smoked  Salmon  Toast 

*Spiced  Venison 

Black  Currant  Jelly 

Creamed  Turnips 

Grilled  Sweet  Potatoes 

Escarole  Salad,  Cheese  Dressing 

Peach  Gateau 

Cofee 

*Spiced  Venison — Rub  a  piece  of 
venison  with  salt,  pepper,  vinegar, 
cloves,  and  allspice;  then  put  into 
baking  pan.  Pour  over  1  cup  melted 
Crisco,  add  2  sliced  onions,  sprig  of 
thyme,  3  sprigs  parsley,  juice  1 
lemon,  and  yi  pint  hot  water.  Cover 
and  bake  in  hot  oven  till  tender. 
Sprinkle  with  flour,  add  1  glassful  of 
sherry  wine  and   allow  to  brown. 


December  1 

Oyster  Bouillon 

*Baked  Beefsteak 

Fried  Beets  Baked  Potatoes 

Grapefruit    and  Endive   Salad 

Nougat  Ice  Cream 

Cofee 

*Baked  Beefsteak — Cut  2  pounds  of 
sirloin,  yi  inch  thick.  Mix  1  cup 
breadcrumbs,  1  tablespoon  Crisco,  1 
tablespoon  chopped  parsley,  yi  table- 
spoon chopped  onion,  ^  teaspoon 
each  of  salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper, 
j'i  teaspoon  kitchen  bouquet,  and 
moisten  with  stock.  Spread  this 
over  stea£  and  roll  it  up,  fastening 
with  skewers  or  tying,  and  put  on 
rack  in  roasting  pan.  Add  ^  cup 
stock,  and  bake  14  hour,  basting 
often.  Place  on  hot  platter,  and 
pour  around  it  sauce  made  from  2 
tablespoons  Crisco  and  3  tablespoons 
flour  blended  together,  with  salt  and 
pepper  to  taste,  and  1^^  cups  beef 
stock  cooked  until  boiling,  then 
strained  and  added  to  1  tablespoon 
Worcestershire   sauce. 


December  2 

Baked  Pork  Spareribs 

Turnips 

Mashed  Potatoes 

Celery  and  Cranberry  Salad 

*Squash  Pie 

Coffee 

*Squash  Pie — 2  cups  stewed  squash, 
1  tablespoon  melted  Crisco,  yi  tea- 
spoon salt,  yi  teaspoon  cinnamon, 
^  cup  sugar;  1  teaspoon  ginger,  2 
eggs,  and  2  cups  milk.  Beat  eggs 
until  light.  Place  squash  in  quart 
measure,  add  sugar,  Crisco,  salt, 
spice,  and  then  beaten  eggs.  Stir 
well  and  add  sufficient  milk  to  make 
1  quart  of  whole  mass.  Turn  into 
pie  tin  lined  with  Crisco  pastry  and 
bake  slowly  for  45  minutes.  When 
done  a  silver  knife  when  inserted  will 
come  out  from  it  clear.  Squash  pie 
will  become  watery  if  allowed  to 
boil. 


224 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


December  ) 

Brown  Fricassee  of  Chicken,  Cranberry 
Jelly 
Sweet  Potatoes  Boiled  Onions 

Orange  and  Pineapple  Salad 
*farina  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Farina  Pudding — Stir  into  3  cups 
boiling  milk  1  cup  farina,  and  cook 
10  minutes.  Rub  together  1  table- 
spoon Crisco  and  2  tablespoons 
sugar;  add  yolks  of  3  eggs,  grated 
rind  of  1  lemon  and  25  chopped 
blanched  almonds.  Stir  this  mix- 
ture into  farina  after  it  is  little 
cooled;  lastly  add  whites  of  3  eggs 
beaten  to  stiff  froth.  Steam  this 
pudding  in  covered  mold  for  1^ 
hours.  Serve  with  any  sweet  pud- 
ding sauce. 

December  4 

Clear  Soup  with   Rice 

Corn  Peas  Mashed  Potatoes 

Cold  Slaw 

Plum  Pudding,  Hard  Sauce 

^Individual  Mince  Pies 

Cheese  Wafers 

Coffee 

*Individual    Mince     Pies — Roll    out 

Crisco  paste  yi  inch  thick,  stamp  into 

rounds  and  line  gem   pans,   place  in 

each    2    teaspoons    of    mince    meat; 

roll  out   more   pastry  rather  thicker 

than    first,    stamp    into    rounds    size 

of  top  of  pans,  wet  edges  and  cover 

pies,    brush    over    with    beaten    egg, 

sprinkle    with    sugar,    and    bake    20 

minutes  in  hot  oven. 

For  mince  meat,  put  into  jar  1 
pound  chopped  apples,  1  pound 
sultana  raisins,  %  pound  chopped 
figs,  ^2  pound  currants,  grated  rind, 
strained  juice  3  lemons,  1  cup  Crisco, 

1  teaspoon  salt,  14  pound  chopped 
almonds,  grated  rind,  strained  juice 
3  oranges,  2  grated  nutmegs,  }4 
cup  sherry,  1  cup  brandy,  I  ounce 
mixed  spice,  }4  pound  each  chopped 
candied  orange  and  lemon  peel,   and 

2  cups  brown  sugar.  Mix  well  and 
keep  in  well  sealed  jar. 


December  5 

*Steamed  Clams 
Roast  Ribs  of  Beef,  Currant  Jelly 
Rice  Croquettes  Stewed  Tomatoes 

Apple  and  Celery  Salad 
Mince  Pie 
Coffee 
*Steamed  Clams — Wash  and  scrub 
clam  shells;  place  in  kettle;  add 
water,  allowing  y^  cup  water  for 
each  peck  of  clams.  Cover  kettle 
and  cook  until  shells  open.  Serve 
hot  with  the  following  sauce:  3  table- 
spoons Crisco,  3  tablespoons  lemon 
juice,  4  tablespoons  chopped  parsley, 
salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper  to  taste. 
Cream  Crisco  and  add  remaining 
ingredients.  Kettle  should  be  re- 
moved from  range  as  soon  as  shells 
open,  otherwise  clams  will  be  over- 
cooked. 

December  6 

Caviar  Canapes 

Roast  Duck  *  Apple  Sauce 

Canned  Beans  Mashed  Potatoes 

Tomato  Jelly  Salad 

Apple  Dumplings 

Raisins  Nuts 

Coffee 

*Apple    Sauce — 1    pound    apples,    2 

tablespoons     sugar,     2     tablespoons 

Crisco,   }4   cup   water,   and   strained 

juice  of  )4  lemon.      Peel,   core,   and 

slice  apples,  put  them  into  saucepan 

with     sugar,     Crisco,    water,    lemon 

juice,    and    cook   them    until   tender. 

Serve  with  roast  duck. 

December  7 

Stewed  Chicken,  Cream  Dressing 
*Baked  Sweet  Potatoes 
Creamed  Carrots  Onion  Salad 

Indian  Pudding 
Bon  Bons  Coffee 

*Baked  Sweet  Potatoes — Peel  boiled 
sweet  potatoes  and  cut  in  slices 
crosswise.  To  2  cups  of  slices  allow 
3  tablespoons  Crisco,  and  2  table- 
spoons each  of  sugar  and  vinegar. 
Have  Crisco  hot,  lay  potatoes  in  it, 


225 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


sprinkle  sugar  over  top,  and  pour 
vinegar  over  lightly.  Bake  until  a 
golden  brown. 

Decembei*  8 

Lamb  Chops 

Creamed  Potatoes  Lima  Beans 

Carrot  Salad 

Pineapple  Ice  Cream  Candy 

Cocoanut  Layer  Cake  Coffee 
*Cocoanut  Layer  Cake — Beat  }4  cup 
Crisco  with  1  cup  sugar  till  creamy, 
add  2  well  beaten  eggs,  }i  teaspoon 
salt,  lyi  cups  flour  sifted  with  2 
teaspoons  baking  powder,  1  cup  water 
and  j4  teaspoon  almond  extract, 
mix  and  divide  into  Criscoed  and 
floured  layer  tins.  Bake  20  minutes 
in  moderate  oven.  Use  boiled  frost- 
ing and  shredded  cocoanut  for  fllling. 

December  9 

Oysters 

*Chicken  Hot  Pot 

Celery  Salad     Dried  Apricot  Shortcake 

Coffee 
*Chicken  Hot  Pot — Prepare  large 
chicken.  Cut  into  as  small  pieces 
as  joints  allow.  Do  not  remove  meats 
from  bones.  Boil  chicken  until 
nearly  tender  and  keep  broth  left 
in  kettle  when  you  remove  chicken 
from  it.  Cut  1  pound  of  lean,  raw 
ham  into  small  squares.  Wash  and 
peel  and  parboil  8  'arge  potatoes  and 
slice  them.  Slice  3  medium-sized 
onions.  Put  into  deep  baking  dish 
layer  of  chicken^  layer  of  ham,  layer 
of  potatoes,  and  layer  of  onions 
Repeat  until  all  are  used  up;  when 
arranging  these  layers  strew  tiny 
bits  of  Crisco  over  them.  Pour 
chicken  broth  over  layers,  well 
seasoned  with  .salt  and  pepper.  Add 
enough  water  to  almost  fill  pot. 
Cover  pot,  and  bake  for  \}i  hours. 
Be  sure  plenty  of  water  is  in  pot 
while  baking  is  in  progress.  When 
cooked  put  baked  chicken  and 
vegetables  in  large  tureen.  Garnish 
edges  with  parsley.  Sprinkle  parsley 
and  sliced  cooked  carrots  over  top. 
Serve  with  small  slice  of  toast  on 
each  plate. 


December  10 

Cream  of  Celery  Soup 
Broiled  Oysters,  a  la  Francaise 
Bean  Salad  Cheese  Straws 

*Fig  and  Apple  Cobbler 
Coffee 
*Fig  and  Apple  Cobbler — Nearly  fill 
Criscoed  baking  dish  with  equal 
amounts  of  sliced  apples  and  chop- 
ped figs,  arranging  them  in  layers; 
add  1  cup  water,  strained  juice  1 
lemon  and  cover  with  Crisco  biscuit 
dough  about  1  inch  thick.  Place 
on  range,  cover  tightly  with  a  pan 
and  simmer  30  minutes.  Lift  cover 
carefully,  make  an  opening  in  middle 
of  crust,  and  pour  in  another  }4  cup 
water,  2  tablespoons  Crisco,  and  1 
cup  scraped  maple  sugar.  Sprinkle 
a  little  maple  sugar  over  top  of  pud- 
ding before  serving  it. 

December  11 

Roast  Pork,  Apple  Sauce 
Franconia  Potatoes       Creamed  Onions 
Endive  and  Grape  Salad 

*Lemon  and  Apple  Tart 
Coffee 
*Lemon  and  Apple  Tart — Line  a  large 
pie  plate  with  Crisco  pastry.  Mix 
together  2  cups  grated  apple,  grated 
rind  and  juice  of  1  lemon,  lyi  cups 
sugar,  2  eggs,  beaten  without  sep- 
arating whites  and  yolks,  2  table- 
spoons melted  Crisco,  }4  teaspoon 
salt  and  1  cup  thin  cream.  Turn 
into  plate  lined  with  pastry,  wet  edge, 
and  put  strips  of  pastry  over  top  of 
filling.  Finish  with  strip  of  pastry 
on  edge.  Let  bake  until  firm  in 
center. 

December  12 

Baked  Codfish 
Piquant  Beets  Baked  Potatoes 

Lettuce  and  Cheese  Salad 
*Bread  Pudding  Coffee 

*Bread  Pudding — 4  cups  bread  cut  in 
dice,  3  tablespoons  sultanas,  2  table- 
spoons chopped  candied  peel,  3 
tablespoons  sugar,  1  tablespoon  Cris- 
co, rind  of  1  lemon,  2  eggs,  yi  table- 
spoon lemon  juice,   1   cup  milk,  and 


226 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


4  lumps  of  sugar.  Put  lump  sugar 
in  dry  saucepan  and  heat  until  it 
turns  dark  brown.  Add  milk  and 
stir  it  over  fire  until  sugar  dissolves. 
Mix  bread,  cleaned  sultanas,  chopped 
peel,  sugar,  Crisco,  grated  lemon  rind, 
and  colored  milk.  Beat  up  eggs  and 
add  them  with  lemon  juice.  Let 
mixture  stand  for  ]A  an  hour,  or 
longer,  if  bread  is  stale.  Have  ready 
Criscoed  mold,  put  in  mixture,  cover 
top  with  piece  of  Criscoed  paper,  and 
steam  it  for  2  hours.  Turn  care- 
fully on  to  hot  dish  and  serve  with 
it  any  good  sweet  sauce. 

December  13 

Chestnut  Soup 

Pork  Chops,  Apple  Sauce 

Potatoes  Steamed  Squash 

Lettuce  and  Pepper  Salad 

*  Raisin  Roly  Poly 

Cofee 

*Raisin   Roly   Poly — 2   cups  flour,  2 

cups  breadcrumbs,  ^  cup  Crisco,  }4 

cup   brown   sugar,   y^    pound   stoned 

raisins,  ^4  tablespoon  salt,  and  cold 

water.     Rub  Crisco  well   into  flour, 

breadcrumbs,    sugar,    salt,    and    add 

raisins     stoned     and     halved.       Add 

enough  water  to  mix  whole  into  soft 

paste.      Roll  into  neat  shape.      Roll 

up   in   floured   and   scalded    pudding 

cloth,   tying   ends   securely.      Put  in 

pan   of  fast    boiling   water,    and   let 

boil  steadily  for  3   hours.     Take  off" 

cloth,  and  serve  pudding  on  hot  dish. 

December  14    ■ 

Corn  Chowder  Bread  Sticks 

Chicken  and  Chestnut  Salad 

Stuffed  Celery 

*Raisin  Puffs,  Vanilla  Sauce 

Coffee 

*  Raisin    Puffs — Beat    2   tablespoons 

Crisco  with  yi  cup  sugar  till  creamy, 

add   1   beaten  egg,  }i  teaspoon  salt, 

yi   cup   milk,    ly^    cups   flour   sifted 

with    2    teaspoons    baking    powder, 

yi   teaspoon    grated    nutmeg,    and    1 

cup  chopped  raisins.     Crisco  baking 

cups  and   fill   half  full  with  mixture 

and  steam  for  1  hour. 


December  15 

Boiled  Ham 

Fried  Potatoes         Asparagus  on  Toast 

Bar-Lf-Duc  and  Cheese  Sandwiches 

*Cocoanut  Pie  Coffee 

*Cocoanut  Pie — 1  cup  chopped  cocoa- 
nut,  3  eggs,  1  cup  cream,  1  cup  milk, 
2  tablespoons  cornstarch,  4  table- 
spoons cold  water,  2  tablespoons 
Crisco,  6  tablespoons  sugar,  and  some 
Crisco  pastry.  Line  2  pie  plates  with 
Crisco  pastry.  Put  milk  and  cream 
into  saucepan,  bring  to  boiling  point, 
add  cornstarch  mixed  with  water. 
Remove  saucepan  from  fire,  stir  in 
Criscc.  Let  stand  until  perfectly 
cold.  Beat  up  yolks  of  eggs  and 
sugar  together,  then  add  cocoanut 
to  them.  Add  this  mixture  to  milk 
with  stiffly  beaten  whites  of  eggs. 
Divide  into  prepared  pie  plates  and 
bake  in  moderate  oven  for  30  min- 
utes.    Serve  hot. 

December  16 

Baked  Fish  Pudding 
Galantine  of  Veal 
*Pea  Croquettes, ,  Tomato  Sauce 
Cream  Cheese  Salad 
Chocolate  Meringues      Coffee 
*Pea  Croquettes — Boil  1  cup  dried  peas 
that    have    been   soaked  over    ught, 
till  tender,  strain  and   press  through 
sieve.   Fry  1  chopped  onion  in  1  table- 
spoon Crisco,   add    to    peas,  with    1 
tablespoon    melte^    Crisco,     2   table- 
spoons flour,  salt  and  pepper  to  taste, 
2    beaten   eggs,   and  breadcrumbs  to 
make  stiff"  enough   to  form  into  cro- 
quettes.      Brush    over    with    beaten 
egg,  toss    in    breadcrumbs,    and   fry 
golden  brown  in  hot    Crisco.  •  Serve 
hot  with  tomato  sauce. 

December  17 

Farina  Soup 

Salmon  Loaf 

Glazed  Potatoes  Stewed  Carrots 

Cabbage  Salad       *Pear  Croquettes 

Coffee 

*Pear    Croquettes — 6    halves    canned 

pears,    5^    cup    rice,    2    tablespoons 

sugar,  2  cups  milk,  1  lemon,   1  egg. 


227 


A  Calendar  of  thinners 


lady  fingers  and  angelica.  Put  milk 
and  sugar  in  saucepan,  bring  to  boil, 
and  then  add  rice  and  grated  rind 
of  1  lemon.  Stir  this  over  fire  until 
rice  is  tender  and  milk  absorbed,  then 
turn  it  on  to  plate,  and  put  aside  to 
cool.  Stand  pears  on  hair  sieve  until 
syrup  has  drained  away,  then  stuff 
hollow  side  with  boiled  rice,  shaping 
it  to  a  dome,  so  that  they  look  like 
whole  pears.  Beat  egg  on  plate, 
crush  lady  fingers,  and  rub  them 
through  wire  sieve.  Dip  stuffed 
pears  in  egg,  and  toss  in  lady  finger 
crumbs.  Have  ready  pan  of  hot 
Crisco,  fry  croquettes  in  it  until  a 
golden  brown.  Take  them  up,  and 
drain  on  paper.  Insert  small  piece 
of  angelica  in  end  of  each  to  repre- 
sent pear-stalk.  Dish  up  and  serve 
hot. 

December  18 

Fillets  of  Flounder 
Tournedos  of  Beef 

*Tomato  Croquettes 
Celery  Mayonnaise         Orange  Tartlets 

Coffee 
*Tomato  Croquettes — Cook  1  quart 
tomatoes  until  reduced  to  2  cups. 
Add  to  them  2  cups  crumbs,  3  table- 
spoons melted  Crisco,  }4  teaspoon 
salt,  dust  sugar,  }4  teaspoon  pepper, 
pinch  red  pepper,  and  dust  of  nut- 
meg. Set  away  to  cool.  Shape  into 
croquettes,  roll  in  flour,  brush  over 
with  beaten  egg,  toss  in  crumbs  and 
fry  in  hot  Crisco. 

December  19 

*Soup  Bonne  Femme 

Broiled  Lamb  Steak  with  Virginia  Ham 

Stuffed  Egg  Plant 

Frontenac  Salad         Apple  Tart 

Coffee 

*Soup  Bonne  Femme — Wash,  dry,  and 

cut   up   2   large   heads   of  lettuce,   1 

pound  sorrel,   and   1   pound  spinach. 

Add  3  pints  white  stock,  and  simmer, 

with  yi  cup  Crisco,  2  carrots,  and  2 

onions,  for  1   hour.      Blend  together 

2  tablespoons  Crisco,  4  tablespoons 

flour,  and  yolks  of  2  eggs,  thin  with 

Icupof  boiling  milk,  and  add  to  broth. 


Season  with  salt  and  pepper,  prest 
through  sieve,  and  serve  with  crou- 
tons. 

December  20 

Lentil  Soup 
Roast  Loin  of  Pork,  Apple  Sauce 
Potato  Balls       Artichokes 
Celery  and  Pineapple  Salad 
*Sultana  Pudding 
Coffee 
*Sultana  Pudding — Line  shallow  dish 
with    plain    pastry,    put    in    bottom 
layer  of  sultana  raisins.     Beat  >^  cup 
Crisco  to  a  cream  with  4  tablespoons 
sugar,  add  2  well  beaten  eggs,  2  table- 
spoons milk,  ^  teaspoon  lemon  ex- 
tract, }4  teaspoon  salt,  and   yi  cup 
flour.      Mix    and    spread    on    top   of 
raisins  and  bake  30  minutes  in  mod- 
erate oven.     Serve  cold. 

December  21 

*Scallops 
Broiled  Squab  Chickens 
Braised  Endive  Potatoes  Anna 

Chiffonade  Salad 
Apricot  Custard 
Coffee 
*Scallops — For  1  pint  of  scallops  take 
2  tablespoons  Crisco.     Melt  in  frying 
pan,     add     scallops     and     2     minced 
onions   and    1    tablespoon   flour  with 
1    pint   liquor   from    scallops.      Cook 
thoroughly,  seasoning  with  salt  and 
bit  of  paprika,  then  add  y2  cup  bread- 
crumbs   and    yolks    of  4   eggs.      Fill 
small   shells  with   mixture   and   bake 
in  quick  oven,  adding,  if  liked,  little 
grated  cheese. 

December  22 

Petite  Marmite 

Goulash  of  Veal 

Saute  Potatoes  Cauliflower 

Orange  Salad 

*Cornstarch  Souffle 

Coffee 

^Cornstarch    Souffle — Bring    1    quart 

milk    and     1     tablespoon    Crisco    to 

boiling    point;    beat    4    tablespoons 

cornstarch   with    1    cup   sugar,   yolks 

of  5   eggs  together   and   add   to  hoc 

milk.     Stir  and  cook  8  minutes,  then 


228 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


add  yi  teaspoon  salt  and  1  tea- 
spoon vanilla  extract.  Pour  into 
Criscoed  fireproof  dish.  Beat  up 
whites  of  eggs  to  stiff  froth,  then 
beat  in  4  tablespoons  sugar,  pour 
over  top  of  pudding  and  brown 
lightly  in  oven. 

December  23 

*Baked  Tripr 
Mashed  Potatoes 
Stuffed  Onions 
Baked  Bean  Salad 
Cheese  Balls 
Stewed  Figs,  Whipped  Cream 
Coffee 
*Baked  Tripe — Cut  tripe  into  good- 
sized    pieces   and    spread   over   them 
the  following  stuffing:     Mix  together 
4  tablespoons  crumbs,  3  tablespoons 
Crisco,   }4  teaspoon  salt,  dust  pow- 
dered   mace,    1    tablespoon    chopped 
cooked    ham,    1    chopped    onion,    1 
tablespoon  chopped  parsley,  X  tea- 
spoon  pepper,   dust   paprika,   and    1 
well  beaten  egg.     Roll  them  up  and 
fasten    with    wooden    toothpicks. 

Dredge  with  flour  and  spread  on 
each  1  tablespoon  Crisco.  Bake  in 
hot  oven  30  minutes,  basting  fre- 
quently with  melted  Crisco  and  hot 
water.  Garnish  with  lemon  slices  and 
pass  melted  butter. 

Vegetarian 
December  24 

Cream  of  Tomato  Soup 
Cheese  Souffle  Graham  Rolls 

Lettuce,  French  Dressing 
*Eve's  Pudding 
Springerle 
Coffee 
*Eve's   Pudding — Mix  together  in   a 
basin,  1  cup  seeded  raisins,  3  table- 
spoons  Crisco,    yi    teaspoon    salt,   2 
cups     crumbs,     1     cup     currants,     8 
chopped    apples,    1    teaspoon    each, 
cinnamon,    cloves,    and    nutmeg,    % 
cup   milk,   and   4   well   beaten   eggs. 
Pour  into  ^riscoed  mold,  cover  with 
greased    paper    and    steam    2    hours. 
Serve  with  hot  milk. 


Chxistmaa  Dinner 
December  25 

Oysters 

Mangoes  Celery  Stuffed  Olives 

Tomato  Soup 

Roast  Turkey,  Cranberry  Jelly 

Roast  Sweet  Potatoes 

Mashed  Turnips 

Brussels  Sprouts 

Orange  and  Celery  Salad 

Vanilla  Blanc-mange 
*English  Plum  Pudding 
Fruit  Coffee 
*English  Plum  Pudding  —  1  cupful 
breadcruir.bs,  1  cupful  flour,  1  cupful 
brown  sugar,  >^  cupful  Crisco,  1  tea- 
spoonful  salt,  2  teaspoonfuls  baking 
powder,  1  teaspoonful  mixed  spices, 
3  eggs,  1  cupful  milk,  ]4  cupful  seeded 
raisins,  >^  cupful  chopped  candied 
citron  peel.  1  cupful  currants,  }4  cup- 
ful chopped  preserved  ginger,  %  cup- 
ful brandy,  >^  cupful  chopped  English 
walnut  meats.  Mix  flour  with  bread- 
crumbs, add  Crisco,  sugar,  salt,  baking 
powder,  spices,  nuts,  fruit,  milk,  eggs 
well  beaten,  and  brandy.  Pour  into 
Criscoed  mold,  cover  with  greased 
paper  and  steam  steadily  for  four 
hours.  Turn  out  and  serve  with  liquid 
or  hard  sauce.  The  brandy  may  be 
omitted. 

December  26 

Stuffed  Veal   Heart,  Tomato  Sauce 
Baked  Sweet  Potatoes 
Mashed  Turnips 
Lettuce,  Apple  and  Date  Salad 
Cream  Cheese  on   Toasted  Crackers 
*Baked  Apples  with  Custard 
Coffee 
*Baked    Apples — Core     and     peel    8 
apples;     fill     centers     with     ^     cup 
Crisco  creamed   with   }4   cup   brown 
sugar,    add    4    tablespoons    chopped 
citron  peel,  and   1  tablespoon  lemon 
juice  mixed  together.     Mix  2  table- 
spoons   sugar    with     }4    cup    water 
and  brush  over  apples;  sprinkle  with 
crumbs  browned  in  hot  Crisco;  bake 
for    20    minutes    in    moderate    oven. 
Serve  cold  with  custard. 


229 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


December  27 

*Terrapin,  a  la  Maryland 

Saratoga  Chips 

Roasted  Capon,  Oyster  Sauce 

Sweet  Potatoes 

Stewed  Celery 

Apple  and  Cabbage  Salad 

Hamburg  Cream 

Cofee 

*Terrapin,  a  la  Maryland — Put  ter- 
rapin in  kettle,  cover  with  .boiling 
salted  water,  add  2  slices  each  carrot 
and  onion,  and  1  stalk  celery.  Cook 
till  meat  is  tender.  Remove  from 
water,  cool,  draw  out  nails  from 
feet,  cut  under  shell  close  to  upper 
shell  and  remove.  Empty  upper 
shell,  remove  and  discard  gall  bladder, 
sand    bags    and    thick    intestines. 

Liver,  small  intestines  are  used 
with  meat.  Add  terrapin  meat  to 
}4  cup  white  stock,  2  tablespoons 
wine;  cook  slowly  until  liquor  is 
reduced  half.  Add  liver  separated  in 
pieces,  2  yolks  of  eggs,  1  tablespoon 
Crisco,  salt,  pepper,  and  red  pepper 
to  taste,  1  tablespoon  flour  mixed 
with  }4  cup  cream,  and  1  teaspoon 
lemon  juice.  Make  hot  and  just 
before  serving  add  1  tablespoon 
sherry  wine.  Turn  into  hot  dish  and 
garnish  with  toast  points. 


December  28 

*Belgian  Hare,  en  Casserole 

Scalloped  Potatoes 

Braised  Celery 

Pineapple  and  Celery  Salad 

Lemon  Pudding,  Caramel  Sauce 

Coffee 

*Belgian  Hare,  en  Casserole — Separate 
hare  into  joints;  season  with  salt, 
paprika  and  red  pepper,  and  saute 
in  %  cup  Crisco  with  2  slices  of 
bacon  cut  in  dice  to  golden  brown. 
Put  hare  in  casserole  with  1  cup 
hot  water  and  put  on  cover.  Bake 
30  minutes,  then  add  2  tablespoons 
Crisco  rubbed  into  2  tablespoons 
flour,  1  cup  water,  seasoning  to  taste, 


and  1  tablespoon  lemon  juice.  Cook 
in  moderate  oven  for  3  hours.  Send 
to  table  without   removing   cover. 

Vegetarian 
December  29 

Nut  Turkey  Roast,  Cranberry  Jelly 

Creamed  Onions 

Baked  Potatoes 

Hubbard  Squash 

Pineapple  and  Orange  Salad 

*  Pastry  Fingers 

Lalla  Rookh 

Cofee 

*  Pastry  Fingers — Sift  K  cup  pastry 
flour,  2  cups  entire  wheat  flour,  and 
1  teaspoon  salt  into  basin,  add  3 
tablespoons  Crisco,  and  K  cup  butter, 
cut  them  into  flours  with  knife  until 
finely  divided.  Then  rub  in  fine 
with  finger  tips  and  make  into  stiff 
paste  with  cold  water.  Roll  out 
l4  inch  in  thickness,  cut  in  finger 
shape  pieces,  lay  on  Criscoed  tins  and 
bake  from  7  to  10  minutes  in  hot 
oven.  Cool,  brush  over  with  slightly 
beaten  egg  white,  and  sprinkle  with 
salted  pine  nuts.  Return  to  oven 
to  brown  nut  meats. 


December  30 

Sirloin  Steak 

Glazed  Pumpkin  Marbled  Potatoes 

Celery  Salad 

Cheese  Relish 

^Boston  Pudding 

Coffee 

*Boston  Pudding — Cut  1  loaf  bread 
into  thin  slices  and  spread  with 
Crisco.  Crisco  baking  dish,  put  into 
it  layer  bread,  sprinkle  over  1  table- 
spoon each  cinnamon,  cloves,  ginger, 
and  nutmeg,  then  a  layer  seeded 
raisins,  and  so  on  till  dish  is  full. 
Pour  over  1  quart  milk  sweetened  to 
taste,  with  3  well  beaten  eggs,  allow 
to  soak  4  hours,  then  add  2  cups 
more  milk  sweetened  to  tasce.  Cover 
dish  and  bake  in  moderate  oven  3 
hours.     Serve  with  wine  sauce. 


230 


A  Calendar  of  Dinners 


December  31 

Codfish,  Delmonico  Style 

Roasted  Leg  of  Lamb 

*Chestnut  Bouletles 

Baked  Potato  Strips 

Watercress  and  Green  Pepper  Salad 

Cherry  and  Almond  Parfait 

Lady  Fingers 

Coffee 

*Chestnut  Boulettes — Mix  together  in 

a    basin    1    cup    mashed    chestnuts, 


which  have  been  peeled  after  cooking 
in  boiling  salted  water,  beat  into 
this  1  tablespoon  whipped  cream. 
yi  tablespoon  Crisco,  \i  teaspoon 
salt,  2  egg  yolks,  1  tablespoon  sugar, 
1  teaspoon  sherry  wine.  Cool  and 
fold  in  beaten  egg  whites,  form 
into  small  balls,  dip  in  beaten  egg, 
toss  in  crumbs  and  fry  in  hot  Crisco. 
Drain  and  serve. 


231 

